Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.4.3. Differentiators
25

could somehow use the current through C as our “output”!
But we can’t.25

2. So we add a small resistor from the low side of the
capacitor to ground, to act as a “current-sensing” resistor
(Figure 1.41B). The good news is that we now have an output proportional to the current through the capacitor. The
bad news is that the circuit is no longer a perfect mathematical differentiator. That’s because the voltage across C
(whose derivative produces the current we are sensing with
R) is no longer equal to Vin; it now equals the difference between Vin and Vout. Here’s how it goes: the voltage across
C is Vin−Vout, so

I = C d

the capacitor fast enough (> 99% in 5 RC time constants,
or 0.05 s). (b) The comparator output would likely bounce
around a bit (see Figure 4.31), just as the (+) input crosses
the reference voltage in its leisurely exponential promenade toward ground, owing to unavoidable bits of electrical
noise. To fix this problem you usually see the circuit arranged so that some of the output is coupled back to the input in a way that reinforces the switching (this is officially
called hysteresis, or positive feedback; we’ll see it in Chapters 4 and 10). (c) In electronic circuits it’s always a good
idea to bypass the dc supply by connecting one or more capacitors between the dc “rail” and ground. The capacitance
is noncritical – values of 0.1 μF to 10 μF are commonly
used; see §1.7.16A.

dt (Vin −Vout) = Vout

R .

If we choose R and C small enough so that dVout/dt ≪
dVin/dt, then

C dVin

dt
≈Vout

R
or

Vout(t) ≈RC d

dt Vin(t).

That is, we get an output proportional to the rate of change
of the input waveform.

Our simple examples above all involved turning some
load on and off. But there are other uses for an electronic
logic signal, like the output of the comparator, that is in
one of two possible binary states, called HIGH and LOW (in
this case +5 V and ground), 1 and 0, or TRUE and FALSE.
For example, such a signal can enable or disable the operation of some other circuit. Imagine that the opening of
a car door triggers our 1 min HIGH output, which then enables a keypad to accept a security code so you can start
the car. After a minute, if you haven’t managed to type the
magic code, it shuts off, thus ensuring a certain minimum
of operator sobriety.

I (t)

Vin(t)

C

To keep dVout/dt ≪dVin/dt, we make the product RC
small, taking care not to “load” the input by making R too
small (at the transition the change in voltage across the capacitor is zero, so R is the load seen by the input). We will
have a better criterion for this when we look at things in the
frequency domain (§1.7.10). If you drive this circuit with a
square wave, the output will be as shown in Figure 1.42.

A.

C

Vin

Vout(t)

Vin(t)

R

Vout

B.

Figure 1.41. Differentiators. A. Perfect (except it has no output terminal). B. Approximate (but at least it has an output!).

Figure 1.42. Output waveform (bottom) from differentiator driven
by a square wave.

1.4.3 Differentiators

Differentiators are handy for detecting leading edges
and trailing edges in pulse signals, and in digital circuitry you sometimes see things like those depicted in Figure 1.43. The RC differentiator generates spikes at the transitions of the input signal, and the output buffer converts

You can make a simple circuit that differentiates an input
signal; that is, Vout ∝dVin/dt. Let’s take it in two steps.

25 Devotees of the cinema will be reminded of Dr. Strangelove’s outburst:
“The whole point of a doomsday machine is lost ... if you keep it
secret!”

1. First look at the (impractical) circuit in Figure 1.41A:
The input voltage Vin(t) produces a current through the capacitor of Icap =CdVin/dt. That’s just what we want – if we
