Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.2.3. Voltage dividers
7

signal in

R1

signal out

volume

R2

(adjustable)

A.

signal in
R1

signal out

volume

R2

B.

D. Input and output
Nearly all electronic circuits accept some sort of applied
input (usually a voltage) and produce some sort of corresponding output (which again is often a voltage). For example, an audio amplifier might produce a (varying) output
voltage that is 100 times as large as a (similarly varying) input voltage. When describing such an amplifier, we imagine measuring the output voltage for a given applied input
voltage. Engineers speak of the transfer function H, the ratio of (measured) output divided by (applied) input; for the
audio amplifier above, H is simply a constant (H = 100).
We’ll get to amplifiers soon enough, in the next chapter.
However, with only resistors we can already look at a very
important circuit fragment, the voltage divider (which you
might call a “de-amplifier”).

1.2.3 Voltage dividers

Figure 1.7. An adjustable voltage divider can be made from a fixed
and variable resistor, or from a potentiometer. In some contemporary circuits you’ll find instead a long series chain of equal-value
resistors, with an arrangement of electronic switches that lets you
choose any one of the junctions as the output; this sounds much
more complicated – but it has the advantage that you can adjust
the voltage ratio electrically (rather than mechanically).

We now come to the subject of the voltage divider, one of
the most widespread electronic circuit fragments. Show us
any real-life circuit and we’ll show you half a dozen voltage dividers. To put it very simply, a voltage divider is a
circuit that, given a certain voltage input, produces a predictable fraction of the input voltage as the output voltage.
The simplest voltage divider is shown in Figure 1.6.

(We’ve used the definition of resistance and the series law.)
Then, for R2,

Vin.
(1.6)

R1

Vout = IR2 =
R2
R1 +R2

R2

Vout

=

R1 + R2
Vin
Vin

Vout
R2

Figure 1.6. Voltage divider. An applied voltage Vin results in a
(smaller) output voltage Vout.

Note that the output voltage is always less than (or equal
to) the input voltage; that’s why it’s called a divider. You
could get amplification (more output than input) if one
of the resistances were negative. This isn’t as crazy as it
sounds; it is possible to make devices with negative “incremental” resistances (e.g., the component known as a tunnel
diode) or even true negative resistances (e.g., the negativeimpedance converter that we will talk about later in the
book, §6.2.4B). However, these applications are rather specialized and need not concern you now.

An important word of explanation: when engineers
draw a circuit like this, it’s generally assumed that the Vin
on the left is a voltage that you are applying to the circuit,
and that the Vout on the right is the resulting output voltage
(produced by the circuit) that you are measuring (or at
least are interested in). You are supposed to know all this
(a) because of the convention that signals generally flow
from left to right, (b) from the suggestive names (“in,”
“out”) of the signals, and (c) from familiarity with circuits
like this. This may be confusing at first, but with time it
becomes easy.

Voltage dividers are often used in circuits to generate a particular voltage from a larger fixed (or varying)
voltage. For instance, if Vin is a varying voltage and R2
is an adjustable resistor (Figure 1.7A), you have a “volume control”; more simply, the combination R1R2 can be
made from a single variable resistor, or potentiometer (Figure 1.7B). This and similar applications are common, and
potentiometers come in a variety of styles, some of which
are shown in Figure 1.8.

What is Vout? Well, the current (same everywhere, assuming no “load” on the output; i.e., nothing connected
across the output) is

.

The humble voltage divider is even more useful, though,
as a way of thinking about a circuit: the input voltage and
upper resistance might represent the output of an amplifier,
say, and the lower resistance might represent the input of

I =
Vin
R1 +R2
