Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.6.6. Circuit applications of diodes
37

C
0

RVD
667Ω

+5V

out
R
signal

in

Figure 1.77. dc restoration.

Figure 1.74. Clamping to voltage divider: equivalent circuit.

R

1.0k

out
in

out
in

667Ω

+5.6V

Figure 1.78. Diode limiter.

Figure 1.75. Poor clamping: voltage divider not stiff enough.

Vclamp

the frequency domain, a subject we’ll take up shortly. For
now we’ll simply say that you can put a capacitor across
the 1k resistor, and its stored charge acts to maintain that
point at constant voltage. For example, a 15 μF capacitor to
ground would make the divider look as if it had a Th´evenin
resistance of less than 10 Ω for frequencies above 1 kHz.
(You could similarly add a bypass capacitor across D1 in
Figure 1.70.) As we’ll learn, the effectiveness of this trick
decreases at low frequencies, and it does nothing at dc.

Figure 1.76. Clamping waveform for circuit of Figure 1.73.

One interesting clamp application is “dc restoration” of
a signal that has been ac coupled (capacitively coupled).
Figure 1.77 shows the idea. This is particularly important
for circuits whose inputs look like diodes (e.g., a transistor
with grounded emitter, as we’ll see in the next chapter);
otherwise an ac-coupled signal will just fade away, as the
coupling capacitor charges up to the signal’s peak voltage.

in Figure 1.74 when the voltage divider is replaced with its
Th´evenin equivalent circuit. When the diode conducts (input voltage exceeds clamp voltage), the output is really just
the output of a voltage divider, with the Th´evenin equivalent resistance of the voltage reference as the lower resistor
(Figure 1.75). So, for the values shown, the output of the
clamp for a triangle-wave input would look as shown in
Figure 1.76. The problem is that the voltage divider doesn’t
provide a stiff reference, in the language of electronics. A
stiff voltage source is one that doesn’t bend easily, i.e., it
has low internal (Th´evenin) resistance.

D. Limiter
One last clamp circuit is shown in Figure 1.78. This circuit limits the output “swing” (again, a common electronics
term) to one diode drop in either polarity, roughly ±0.6 V.
That might seem awfully small, but if the next stage is an
amplifier with large voltage amplification, its input will always be near 0 V; otherwise the output is in “saturation”
(e.g., if the next stage has a gain of 1000 and operates from
±15 V supplies, its input must stay in the range ±15 mV
in order for its output not to saturate). Figure 1.79 shows
what a limiter does to oversize sinewaves and spikes. This
clamp circuit is often used as input protection for a highgain amplifier.

In practice, the problem of finite impedance of the
voltage-divider reference can be easily solved by use of a
transistor or an op-amp. This is usually a better solution
than using very small resistor values, because it doesn’t
consume large currents, yet it provides a voltage reference
with a Th´evenin resistance of a few ohms or less. Furthermore, there are other ways to construct a clamp, using an
op-amp as part of the clamp circuit. You will see these
methods in Chapter 4.

E. Diodes as nonlinear elements
To a good approximation the forward current through a
diode is proportional to an exponential function of the

Alternatively, a simple way to stiffen the clamp circuit
of Figure 1.73, for time-varying signals only, is to add a socalled bypass capacitor across the lower (1 kΩ) resistor. To
understand this fully we need to know about capacitors in
