Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.7.11. Inductors versus capacitors
51

The RC integrator (§1.4.4) is the same circuit as the lowpass filter; by similar reasoning, the criterion for a good integrator is that the lowest signal frequencies must be well
above the 3 dB point.

1.7.11 Inductors versus capacitors

In Figure 1.104, we’ve plotted the same lowpass filter
response with logarithmic axes, which is a more common
way that it’s done. You can think of the vertical axis as
decibels, and the horizontal axis as octaves (or decades).
On such a plot, equal distances correspond to equal ratios. We’ve also plotted the phase shift, using a linear vertical axis (degrees) and the same logarithmic frequency
axis. This sort of plot is good for seeing the detailed response even when it is greatly attenuated (as at right); we’ll
see a number of such plots in Chapter 6, when we treat
active filters. Note that the filter curve plotted here becomes a straight line at large attenuations, with a slope of
−20 dB/decade (engineers prefer to say “−6 dB/octave”).
Note also that the phase shift goes smoothly from 0◦(at frequencies well below the breakpoint) to −90◦(well above
it), with a value of −45◦at the −3 dB point. A rule of
thumb for single-section RC filters is that the phase shift
is ≈6◦from its asymptotic value at 0.1 f3dB and at 10f3dB.

Exercise 1.31. Prove the last assertion.

Instead of capacitors, inductors can be combined with resistors to make lowpass (or highpass) filters. In practice,
however, you rarely see RL lowpass or highpass filters. The
reason is that inductors tend to be more bulky and expensive and perform less well (i.e., they depart further from
the ideal) than capacitors (see Chapter 1x). If you have a
choice, use a capacitor. One important exception to this
general statement is the use of ferrite beads and chokes in
high-frequency circuits. You just string a few beads here
and there in the circuit; they make the wire interconnections slightly inductive, raising the impedance at very high
frequencies and preventing oscillations, without the added
series resistance you would get with an RC filter. An RF
choke is an inductor, usually a few turns of wire wound
on a ferrite core, used for the same purpose in RF circuits.
Note, however, that inductors are essential components in
(a) LC tuned circuits (§1.7.14), and (b) switch-mode power
converters (§9.6.4).

1.7.12 Phasor diagrams

An interesting question is the following: is it possible
to make a filter with some arbitrary specified amplitude response and some other arbitrary specified phase response?
Surprisingly, the answer is no: the demands of causality
(i.e., that response must follow cause, not precede it) force
a relationship between phase and amplitude response of realizable analog filters (known officially as the Kramers–
Kronig relation).

1.7.10 RC differentiators and integrators in the
frequency domain

The RC differentiator that we saw in §1.4.3 is exactly the
same circuit as the highpass filter in this section. In fact, it
can be considered as either, depending on whether you’re
thinking of waveforms in the time domain or response
in the frequency domain. We can restate the earlier timedomain condition for its proper operation (dVout≪dVin) in
terms of the frequency response: for the output to be small
compared with the input, the signal frequency (or frequencies) must be well below the 3 dB point. This is easy to
check: suppose we have the input signal Vin = sinωt. Then,
using the equation we obtained earlier for the differentiator
output, we have

Vout = RC d

dt sinωt = ωRCcosωt,

and so dVout≪dVin if ωRC ≪1, i.e., RC ≪1/ω. If the
input signal contains a range of frequencies, this must hold
for the highest frequencies present in the input.

There’s a nice graphical method that can be helpful when
we are trying to understand reactive circuits. Let’s take an
example, namely, the fact that an RC filter attenuates 3 dB
at a frequency f = 1/2πRC, which we derived in §1.7.8.
This is true for both highpass and lowpass filters. It is easy
to get a bit confused here, because at that frequency the reactance of the capacitor equals the resistance of the resistor; so you might at first expect 6 dB attenuation (a factor
of 1/2 in voltage). That is what you would get, for example,
if you were to replace the capacitor with a resistor of the
same impedance magnitude. The confusion arises because
the capacitor is reactive, but the matter is clarified by a phasor diagram (Figure 1.105). The axes are the real (resistive)
and imaginary (reactive) components of the impedance. In
a series circuit like this, the axes also represent the (complex) voltage, because the current is the same everywhere.
So for this circuit (think of it as an RC voltage divider)
the input voltage (applied across the series RC pair) is proportional to the length of the hypotenuse, and the output
voltage (across R only) is proportional to the length of the
R leg of the triangle. The diagram represents the situation
at the frequency where the capacitor’s reactance equals R,
