42
1.7. Impedance and reactance
Art of Electronics Third Edition

current, in a capacitor driven at a frequency ω, is just

-40

|V|

-30

|I| =
1
ωC ,

-20

-10

0

which we can think of as a sort of “resistance” – the magnitude of the current is proportional to the magnitude of
the applied voltage. The official name for this quantity is
reactance, with the symbol X, thus XC for the reactance of
a capacitor.37 So, for a capacitor,

1

exact

approx
approx

XC =
1
ωC .
(1.26)

0.8

0.6

0.4

% error
Vout / Vin

lowpass
highpass

0.2

0

f/fo
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000

This means that a larger capacitance has a smaller reactance. And this makes sense, because, for example, if you
double the value of a capacitor, it takes twice as much
current to charge and discharge it through the same voltage swing in the same time (recall I = CdV/dt). For the
same reason the reactance decreases as you increase the
frequency – doubling the frequency (while holding V constant) doubles the rate of change of voltage and therefore
requires that you double the current, thus half the reactance.

Figure 1.91. Frequency response of single-section RC filters,
showing the results both of a simple approximation that ignores
phase (dashed curve), and the exact result (solid curve). The fractional error (i.e., dashed/solid) is plotted above.

Vout

=
1/ωC
R+1/ωC =
1
1+ωRC
(approximate!)

≍
XC
R+XC

Vin

(1.27)

So, roughly speaking, we can think of a capacitor as
a “frequency-dependent resistor.” Sometimes that’s good
enough, sometimes it isn’t. We’ll look at a few circuits in
which this simplified view gets us reasonably good results,
and provides nice intuition; later we’ll fix it up, using the
correct complex algebra, to get a precise result. (Keep in
mind that the results we are about to get are approximate;
we’re lying to you – but it’s a small lie, and anyway we’ll
tell the truth later. In the meantime we’ll use the weird symbol ≍instead of = in all such “approximate equations,” and
we’ll flag the equation as approximate.)

R
Vin
Vout

We’ve plotted that ratio in Figure 1.91 (and also that of its
cousin, the highpass filter), along with their exact results
that we’ll understand soon enough in §1.7.8.

C

Figure 1.90. Lowpass filter.

A. RC lowpass filter (approximate)
The circuit in Figure 1.90 is called a lowpass filter, because
it passes low frequencies and blocks high frequencies. If
you think of it as a frequency-dependent voltage divider,
this makes sense: the lower leg of the divider (the capacitor) has a decreasing reactance with increasing frequency,
so the ratio of Vout/Vin decreases accordingly:

You can see that the circuit passes low frequencies fully
(because at low frequencies the capacitor’s reactance is
very high, so it’s like a divider with a smaller resistor atop
a larger one) and that it blocks high frequencies. In particular, the crossover from “pass” to “block” (often called the
breakpoint) occurs at a frequency ω0 at which the capacitor’s reactance (1/ω0C) is equal to the resistance R: ω0 =
1/RC. At frequencies well beyond the crossover (where the
product ωRC ≫1), the output decreases inversely with increasing frequency; that makes sense because the reactance
of the capacitor, already much smaller than R, continues
dropping as 1/ω. It’s worth noting that, even with our “ignoration of phase shifts,” the equation (and graph) for the
ratio of voltages is quite accurate at both low and high frequencies and is only modestly in error around the crossover

37 Later we’ll see inductors, which also have a 90◦phase shift (though of
the opposite sign), and so are likewise characterized by a reactance XL.
