2
1.2. Voltage, current, and resistance
Art of Electronics Third Edition

In real circuits we connect things together with wires
(metallic conductors), each of which has the same voltage
on it everywhere (with respect to ground, say).4 We mention this now so that you will realize that an actual circuit
doesn’t have to look like its schematic diagram, because
wires can be rearranged.

Here are some simple rules about voltage and current:

potential difference or electromotive force (EMF). The
unit of measure is the volt, with voltages usually expressed in volts (V), kilovolts (1 kV = 103 V), millivolts
(1 mV = 10−3 V), or microvolts (1 μV = 10−6 V) (see
the box on prefixes). A joule (J) of work is done in moving a coulomb (C) of charge through a potential difference of 1 V. (The coulomb is the unit of electric charge,
and it equals the charge of approximately 6×1018 electrons.) For reasons that will become clear later, the opportunities to talk about nanovolts (1 nV = 10−9 V) and
megavolts (1 MV = 106 V) are rare.
Current (symbol I). Current is the rate of flow of elec-

1. The sum of the currents into a point in a circuit equals
the sum of the currents out (conservation of charge).
This is sometimes called Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL).
Engineers like to refer to such a point as a node. It follows that, for a series circuit (a bunch of two-terminal
things all connected end-to-end), the current is the same
everywhere.

A
B

Figure 1.1. Parallel connection.

tric charge past a point. The unit of measure is the
ampere, or amp, with currents usually expressed in
amperes (A), milliamperes (1 mA = 10−3 A), microamperes (1 μA = 10−6 A), nanoamperes (1 nA = 10−9 A),
or occasionally picoamperes (1 pA = 10−12 A). A current of 1 amp equals a flow of 1 coulomb of charge per
second. By convention, current in a circuit is considered
to flow from a more positive point to a more negative
point, even though the actual electron flow is in the opposite direction.

Important: from these definitions you can see that currents flow through things, and voltages are applied (or appear) across things. So you’ve got to say it right: always refer to the voltage between two points or across two points
in a circuit. Always refer to current through a device or
connection in a circuit.

2. Things hooked in parallel (Figure 1.1) have the same
voltage across them. Restated, the sum of the “voltage
drops” from A to B via one path through a circuit equals
the sum by any other route, and is simply the voltage
between A and B. Another way to say it is that the sum
of the voltage drops around any closed circuit is zero.
This is Kirchhoff’s voltage law (KVL).
3. The power (energy per unit time) consumed by a circuit
device is

P = VI
(1.1)

To say something like “the voltage through a resistor
. . . ” is nonsense. However, we do frequently speak of the
voltage at a point in a circuit. This is always understood to
mean the voltage between that point and “ground,” a common point in the circuit that everyone seems to know about.
Soon you will, too.

This is simply (energy/charge) × (charge/time). For V in
volts and I in amps, P comes out in watts. A watt is a
joule per second (1W = 1 J/s). So, for example, the current flowing through a 60W lightbulb running on 120 V
is 0.5 A.

We generate voltages by doing work on charges in
devices such as batteries (conversion of electrochemical
energy), generators (conversion of mechanical energy by
magnetic forces), solar cells (photovoltaic conversion of
the energy of photons), etc. We get currents by placing voltages across things.

Power goes into heat (usually), or sometimes mechanical work (motors), radiated energy (lamps, transmitters),
or stored energy (batteries, capacitors, inductors). Managing the heat load in a complicated system (e.g., a large
computer, in which many kilowatts of electrical energy are
converted to heat, with the energetically insignificant byproduct of a few pages of computational results) can be a
crucial part of the system design.

At this point you may well wonder how to “see” voltages and currents. The single most useful electronic instrument is the oscilloscope, which allows you to look at voltages (or occasionally currents) in a circuit as a function
of time.3 We will deal with oscilloscopes, and also voltmeters, when we discuss signals shortly; for a preview see
Appendix O, and the multimeter box later in this chapter.

3 It has been said that engineers in other disciplines are envious of electrical engineers, because we have such a splendid visualization tool.

4 In the domain of high frequencies or low impedances, that isn’t strictly
true, and we will have more to say about this later, and in Chapter 1x.
For now, it’s a good approximation.
