14
1.3. Signals
Art of Electronics Third Edition

+5V

second. Just remember the important relation ω = 2π f and
you won’t go wrong.

red LED
VF = 1.6V
@ 5mA

R1
10k

Y

R3
10k
R5
680Ω

–

X

+

goes low
when VX < VY

TLC 372
comparator

R2
8.06k

R4

thermistor:
#103JG1F

10.0k @ 25°C 8.06k @ 30°C 6.53k @ 35°C

Figure 1.18. The LED lights up when it’s hotter than 30◦C. The
comparator (which we’ll see later, in Chapters 4 and 12) pulls its
output to ground when the voltage at “X” is less than the voltage
at “Y.” R4 is a thermistor, which is a resistor with a deliberate negative temperature coefficient; that is, its resistance decreases with
increasing temperature – by about 4%/◦C.

types of signals, voltages that change in time in a particular way.

1.3.1 Sinusoidal signals

Sinusoidal signals are the most popular signals around;
they’re what you get out of the wall plug. If someone says
something like “take a 10 μV signal at 1 MHz,” they mean
a sinewave. Mathematically, what you have is a voltage described by

V = Asin2π ft
(1.10)

The great merit of sinewaves (and the cause of their
perennial popularity) is the fact that they are the solutions
to certain linear differential equations that happen to describe many phenomena in nature as well as the properties of linear circuits. A linear circuit has the property
that its output, when driven by the sum of two input signals, equals the sum of its individual outputs when driven
by each input signal in turn; i.e., if O(A) represents the
output when driven by signal A, then a circuit is linear
if O(A + B) = O(A) + O(B). A linear circuit driven by
a sinewave always responds with a sinewave, although in
general the phase and amplitude are changed. No other periodic signal can make this statement. It is standard practice, in fact, to describe the behavior of a circuit by its frequency response, by which we mean the way the circuit
alters the amplitude of an applied sinewave as a function
of frequency. A stereo amplifier, for instance, should be
characterized by a “flat” frequency response over the range
20 Hz to 20 kHz, at least.
The sinewave frequencies we usually deal with range
from a few hertz to a few tens of megahertz. Lower frequencies, down to 0.0001 Hz or lower, can be generated
with carefully built circuits, if needed. Higher frequencies,
up to say 2000 MHz (2 GHz) and above, can be generated, but they require special transmission-line techniques.
Above that, you’re dealing with microwaves, for which
conventional wired circuits with lumped-circuit elements
become impractical, and exotic waveguides or “striplines”
are used instead.

where A is called the amplitude and f is the frequency in
hertz (cycles per second). A sinewave looks like the wave
shown in Figure 1.19. Sometimes it is important to know
the value of the signal at some arbitrary time t = 0, in which
case you may see a phase φ in the expression:

1.3.2 Signal amplitudes and decibels

V = Asin(2π ft +φ).

A

t

√

In addition to its amplitude, there are several other ways to
characterize the magnitude of a sinewave or any other signal. You sometimes see it specified by peak-to-peak amplitude (pp amplitude), which is just what you would guess,
namely, twice the amplitude. The other method is to give
the root-mean-square amplitude (rms amplitude), which is
Vrms = (1/

3
2f
1
f
1
2f

Figure 1.19. Sinewave of amplitude A and frequency f.

The other variation on this simple theme is the use of
angular frequency, which looks like this:

2)A = 0.707A (this is for sinewaves only; the
ratio of pp to rms will be different for other waveforms).
Odd as it may seem, this is the usual method, because rms
voltage is what’s used to compute power. The nominal voltage across the terminals of a wall socket (in the United
States) is 120 volts rms, 60 Hz. The amplitude is 170 volts
(339 volts pp).18

V = Asinωt.

18 Occasionally you’ll encounter devices (e.g., mechanical movingpointer meters) that respond to the average magnitude of an ac signal.

Here ω is the angular frequency, measured in radians per
