40
1.7. Impedance and reactance
Art of Electronics Third Edition

compensating filter

2

speaker

1

lowest
note on
piano

highest
note on

piano

middle C

relative response (linear scale)

√

20kHz
2kHz
200Hz
20Hz

Figure 1.86. The goal is to charge up the capacitor from a
source of dc voltage Vin. In the top circuit (Figure 1.86A)
we’ve done it the conventional way, with a series resistor to limit the peak current demanded from the voltage
source. OK, it does work – but it has a drawback that can
be serious, namely that half the energy is lost as heat in the
resistor. By contrast, in the circuit with the inductor (Figure 1.86B) no energy is lost (assuming ideal components);
and, as a bonus, the capacitor gets charged to twice the
input voltage. The output-voltage waveform is a sinusoidal
half-cycle at the resonant frequency f = 1/2π

audible frequencies

LC, a topic
we’ll see soon (§1.7.14).34,35

ultrasonic

frequency (log scale)
infrasonic

Vin/R

V(t)

R

I

+

C

Vin

Figure 1.87. Example of frequency analysis: “boom box” loudspeaker equalization. The lowest and highest piano notes, called
A0 and C8, are at 27.5 Hz and 4.2 kHz; they are four octaves below
A440 and four octaves above middle C, respectively.

–

Vin

V

t

A.

1.7 Impedance and reactance

D

L

V(t)

tf

I

+

C

Vin

Warning: this section is somewhat mathematical; you may
wish to skip over the mathematics, but be sure to pay attention to the results and graphs.

2Vin

–

V

B.

t

Figure 1.86. Resonant charging is lossless (with ideal components) compared with the 50% efficiency of resistive charging.
Charging is complete after tf, equal to a half-cycle of the resonant
frequency. The series diode terminates the cycle, which would otherwise continue to oscillate between 0 and 2Vin.

Circuits with capacitors and inductors are more complicated than the resistive circuits we talked about earlier, in that their behavior depends on frequency: a “voltage divider” containing a capacitor or inductor will have
a frequency-dependent division ratio. In addition, circuits
containing these components (known collectively as reactive components) “corrupt” input waveforms such as
square waves, as we saw earlier.

However, both capacitors and inductors are linear devices, meaning that the amplitude of the output waveform,
whatever its shape, increases exactly in proportion to the
input waveform’s amplitude. This linearity has many consequences, the most important of which is probably the
following: the output of a linear circuit, driven with a
sinewave at some frequency f, is itself a sinewave at the
same frequency (with, at most, changed amplitude and
phase).

Because of this remarkable property of circuits containing resistors, capacitors, and inductors (and, later, linear
amplifiers), it is particularly convenient to analyze any such
circuit by asking how the output voltage (amplitude and
phase) depends on the input voltage for sinewave input at a
single frequency, even though this may not be the intended
use. A graph of the resulting frequency response, in which
the ratio of output to input is plotted for each sinewave
frequency, is useful for thinking about many kinds of

34 A mechanical analogy may be helpful here. Imagine dropping packages onto a conveyor belt that is moving at speed v; the packages are
accelerated to that speed by friction, with 50% efficiency, finally reaching the belt speed v, at which speed they ride into the sunset. That’s resistive charging. Now we try something completely different, namely,
we rig up a conveyor belt with little catchers attached by springs to the
belt; and alongside it we have a second belt, running at twice the speed
(2v). Now when we drop a package onto the first conveyor it compresses a spring, then rebounds at 2v; and it makes a soft landing onto
the second conveyor. No energy is lost (ideal springs), and the package
rides off into the sunset at 2v. That’s reactive charging.
35 Resonant charging is used for the high-voltage supply in flashlamps
and stroboscopes, with the advantages of (a) full charge between
flashes (spaced no closer than tf), and (b) no current immediately after
discharge (see waveforms), thus permitting the flashlamp to “quench”
after each flash.
