Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.2.5. Th´evenin equivalent circuit
11

10k

examples in the chapters ahead. This high-resistance condition ideally characterizes measuring instruments such as
voltmeters and oscilloscopes.

+

5k

30V
+

10k

15V

A word on language: you frequently hear things like
“the resistance looking into the voltage divider” or “the
output sees a load of so-and-so many ohms,” as if circuits
had eyes. It’s OK (in fact, it’s a rather good way of keeping
straight which resistance you’re talking about) to say what
part of the circuit is doing the “looking.”16

Thévenin
actual

1.0

10

Figure 1.13. Voltage divider example.

0.8

8

0.6

6

0.4

4

VOUT/VOPEN

0.2

2

% Reduction from VOPEN

0.0

0

0.1
1
10
100
RLOAD/ROUT

Figure 1.14. To minimize the attenuation of a signal source below
its open-circuit voltage, keep the load resistance large compared
with the output resistance.

in series with a resistor. For example, the output terminals
of a 10k–10k voltage divider driven by a perfect 30 volt
battery are precisely equivalent to a perfect 15 volt battery in series with a 5k resistor (Figure 1.13). Attaching
a load resistor causes the voltage divider’s output to drop,
owing to the finite source resistance (Th´evenin equivalent
resistance of the voltage divider output, viewed as a source
of voltage). This is often undesirable. One solution to the
problem of making a stiff voltage source (“stiff” is used in
this context to describe something that doesn’t bend under
load) might be to use much smaller resistors in a voltage
divider. Occasionally this brute-force approach is useful.
However, it is usually best to construct a voltage source, or
power supply, as it’s commonly called, using active components like transistors or operational amplifiers, which we
will treat in Chapters 2–4. In this way you can easily make
a voltage source with internal (Th´evenin equivalent) resistance as small as milliohms (thousandths of an ohm), without the large currents and dissipation of power characteristic of a low-resistance voltage divider delivering the same
performance. In addition, with an active power supply it is
easy to make the output voltage adjustable. These topics
are treated extensively in Chapter 9.

B. Power transfer
Here is an interesting problem: what load resistance will
result in maximum power being transferred to the load for
a given source resistance? (The terms source resistance,
internal resistance, and Th´evenin equivalent resistance all
mean the same thing.) It is easy to see that either Rload=0
or Rload=∞results in zero power transferred, because
Rload=0 means thatVload=0 and Iload=Vsource/Rsource, so that
Pload=VloadIload=0. But Rload=∞means that Vload=Vsource
and Iload=0, so that again Pload=0. There has to be a maximum in between.

Exercise 1.11. Show that Rload = Rsource maximizes the power in
the load for a given source resistance. Note: skip this exercise if
you don’t know calculus, and take it on faith that the answer is
true.

The concept of equivalent internal resistance applies to
all sorts of sources, not just batteries and voltage dividers.
Signal sources (e.g., oscillators, amplifiers, and sensing devices) all have an equivalent internal resistance. Attaching a load whose resistance is less than or even comparable to the internal resistance will reduce the output considerably. This undesirable reduction of the open-circuit
voltage (or signal) by the load is called “circuit loading.”
Therefore you should strive to make Rload≫Rinternal, because a high-resistance load has little attenuating effect on
the source (Figure 1.14).15 We will see numerous circuit

dio frequencies and transmission lines, you must “match impedances”
(i.e., set Rload=Rinternal) in order to prevent reflection and loss of power.
See Appendix H on transmission lines.
16 The urge to anthropomorphize runs deep in the engineering and scientific community, despite warnings like “don’t anthropomorphize computers ... they don’t like it.”

15 There are two important exceptions to this general principle: (1) a current source has a high (ideally infinite) internal resistance and should
drive a load of relatively low load resistance; (2) when dealing with ra-
