48
1.7. Impedance and reactance
Art of Electronics Third Edition

Vin

Z1

Vout

Z2

in this case. The power factor is the cosine of the phase
angle between the voltage and the current, and it ranges
from 0 (purely reactive circuit) to 1 (purely resistive). A
power factor of less than 1 indicates some component of
reactive current.43 It’s worth noting that the power factor
goes to unity, and the dissipated power goes to V 2/R, in
the limit of large capacitance (or of high frequency), where
the reactance of the capacitor becomes much less than R.

Figure 1.96. Generalized voltage divider: a pair of arbitrary
impedances.

Exercise 1.28. Show that all the average power delivered to the
preceding circuit winds up in the resistor. Do this by computing
the value of V 2

R/R. What is that power, in watts, for a series circuit
of a 1 μF capacitor and a 1.0k resistor placed across the 115 volt
(rms), 60 Hz powerline?

.

Vout = IZ2 = Vin

Z2
Z1 +Z2

Rather than worrying about this result in general, let’s look
at some simple (but very important) examples, beginning
with the RC highpass and lowpass filters we approximated
earlier.

1.7.8 RC highpass filters

Power factor is a serious matter in large-scale electrical
power distribution, because reactive currents don’t result in
useful power being delivered to the load, but cost the power
company plenty in terms of I2R heating in the resistance of
generators, transformers, and wiring. Although residential
users are billed only for “real” power [Re(VI∗)], the power
company charges industrial users according to the power
factor. This explains the capacitor yards that you see behind
large factories, built to cancel the inductive reactance of
industrial machinery (i.e., motors).

Exercise 1.29. Show that adding a series capacitor of value C =
1/ω2L makes the power factor equal 1.0 in a series RL circuit.
Now do the same thing, but with the word “series” changed to
“parallel.”

1.7.7 Voltage dividers generalized

We’ve seen that by combining resistors with capacitors
it is possible to make frequency-dependent voltage dividers, owing to the frequency dependence of a capacitor’s
impedance ZC = −j/ωC. Such circuits can have the desirable property of passing signal frequencies of interest
while rejecting undesired signal frequencies. In this subsection and the next we revisit the simple lowpass and
highpass RC filters, correcting the approximate analysis
of §1.7.1; though simple, these circuits are important and
widely used. Chapter 6 and Appendix E describe filters of
greater sophistication.

Referring back to the classic RC highpass filter (Figure 1.92), we see that the complex Ohm’s law (or the complex voltage-divider equation) gives

Vout = Vin

R
R−j/ωC = Vin

R(R+ j/ωC)
R2 +(1/ω2C2).

(For the last step, multiply top and bottom by the complex
conjugate of the denominator.) Most often we don’t care
about the phase of Vout, just its amplitude:

Our original voltage divider (Figure 1.6) consisted of a pair
of resistors in series to ground, input at the top and output
at the junction. The generalization of that simple resistive
divider is a similar circuit in which either or both resistors are replaced with a capacitor or inductor (or a more
complicated network made from R, L, and C), as in Figure 1.96. In general, the division ratio Vout/Vin of such a divider is not constant, but depends on frequency (as we have
already seen, in our approximate treatment of the lowpass
and highpass filters in §1.7.1). The analysis is straightforward:

Vout = (VoutV∗

out)1/2

,

I =
Vin
Ztotal

=
R
[R2 +(1/ω2C2)]1/2 Vin.

Note the analogy to a resistive divider, where

Ztotal = Z1 +Z2

Vin.

Vout =
R2
R1 +R2

43 Or, for nonlinear circuits, it indicates that the current waveform is not
proportional to the voltage waveform. More on this in §9.7.1.

Here the impedance of the series RC combination
