20
1.4. Capacitors and ac circuits
Art of Electronics Third Edition

Figure 1.30. Capacitors masquerade as anything they like! Here is a representative collection. In the lower left are small-value variable
capacitors (one air, three ceramic), with large-value polarized aluminum electrolytics above them (the three on the left have radial leads,
the three on the right have axial leads, and the specimen with screw terminals at top is often called a computer electrolytic). Next in
line across the top is a low-inductance film capacitor (note the wide strap terminals), then an oil-filled paper capacitor, and last, a set
of disc ceramic capacitors running down the right. The four rectangular objects below are film capacitors (polyester, polycarbonate, or
polypropylene). The D-subminiature connector seems misplaced – but it is a filtered connector, with a 1000 pF capacitor from each pin
to the shell. To its left is a group of seven polarized tantalum electrolytics (five with axial leads, one radial, and one surface-mount). The
three capacitors above them are axial-film capacitors. The ten capacitors at bottom center are all ceramic types (four with radial leads,
two axial, and four surface-mount chip capacitors); above them are high-voltage capacitors – an axial-glass capacitor, and a ceramic
transmitting capacitor with screw terminals. Finally, below them and to the left are four mica capacitors and a pair of diode-like objects
known as varactors, which are voltage-variable capacitors made from a diode junction.

so you don’t need to assume constant current charging (though
you’re welcome to do so). At any instant the rate of flow of energy
into the capacitor is VI (joules/s); so you need to integrate dU =
VIdt from start to finish. Take it from there.

Capacitors come in an amazing variety of shapes and
sizes (Figure 1.30 shows examples of most of them); with
time, you will come to recognize their more common incarnations. For the smallest capacitances you may see examples of the basic parallel-plate (or cylindrical piston) construction. For greater capacitance, you need more area and

closer spacing; the usual approach is to plate some conductor onto a thin insulating material (the dielectric), for instance, aluminized plastic film rolled up into a small cylindrical configuration. Other popular types are thin ceramic
wafers (ceramic chip capacitors), metal foils with oxide
insulators (electrolytic capacitors), and metallized mica.
Each of these types has unique properties; for a brief rundown, see the section on capacitors in Chapter 1x. In general, ceramic and polyester types are used for most noncritical circuit applications; capacitors with polycarbonate,
polystyrene, polypropylene, Teflon, or glass dielectric are
