Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.9.4. Indicators
61

Figure 1.124. Circular connectors. A selection of multipin and other “non-RF” connectors; the panel-mounting receptacle is shown to the
left of each cable-mounted plug. Top row, left to right: “MS”-type (MIL-C-5015) rugged connector (available in hundreds of configurations),
high-current (50 A) “Supericon,” multipin locking XLR. Middle row: weatherproof (Switchcraft EN3), 12 mm video (Hirose RM), circular
DIN, circular mini-DIN, 4-pin microphone connector. Bottom row: locking 6-pin (Lemo), microminiature 7-pin shielded (Microtech EP-7S),
miniature 2-pin shrouded (Litton SM), 2.5 mm power, banana, pin jack.

Components Hall of Infamy, some charter members of
which are shown in Figure 1.126.

and they come with different lug styles according to the
method of connection. You can solder them to a “motherboard” or “backplane,” which is itself just another PCB
containing the interconnecting wiring between the individual circuit cards. Alternatively, you may want to use edge
connectors with standard solder-lug terminations, particularly in a system with only a few cards. A more reliable
(though more costly) solution is the use of “two-part” PCB
connectors, in which one part (soldered onto the board)
mates with the other part (on a backplane, etc); an example
is the widely used VME (VersaModule Eurocard) connector (upper right-hand corner of Figure 1.123).

C. Multipin connectors
Very frequently electronic instruments demand multiwire
cables and connectors. There are literally dozens of different kinds. The simplest example is a three-wire “IEC”
powerline cord connector. Among the more popular are
the excellent type-D subminiature, the Winchester MRA
series, the venerable MS type, and the flat ribbon-cable
mass-termination connectors. These and others are shown
in Figure 1.123.

1.9.4 Indicators

Beware of connectors that can’t tolerate being dropped
on the floor (the miniature hexagon connectors are classic)
or that don’t provide a secure locking mechanism (e.g., the
Jones 300 series).

D. Card-edge connectors
The most common method used to make connection to
printed-circuit cards is the card-edge connector, which
mates to a row of gold-plated contacts at the edge of the
card; common examples are the motherboard connectors
that accept plug-in computer memory modules. Card-edge
connectors may have from 15 to 100 or more connections,

A. Meters
To read out the value of some voltage or current, you have
a choice between the time-honored moving-pointer type of
meter and digital-readout meters. The latter are more expensive and more accurate. Both types are available in a
variety of voltage and current ranges. There are, in addition, exotic panel meters that read out such things as VUs
(volume units, an audio dB scale), expanded-scale ac volts
(e.g., 105 to 130 V), temperature (from a thermocouple),
