10
1.2. Voltage, current, and resistance
Art of Electronics Third Edition

set of switchable ranges. Ideally, a current-measuring meter should have
zero resistance13 in order not to disturb the circuit under test, since it
must be put in series with the circuit. In practice, you tolerate a few
tenths of a volt drop (sometimes called “voltage burden”) with both
VOMs and digital multimeters. For either kind of meter, selecting a
current range puts a small resistor across the meter’s input terminals,
typically of resistance value to create a voltage drop of 0.1 V to 0.25 V
for the chosen full-scale current; the voltage drop is then converted to a
corresponding current indication.14 Typically, multimeters provide current ranges from 50 μA (or less) to an amp (or more), full scale.

MULTIMETERS
There are numerous instruments that let you measure voltages and currents in a circuit. The oscilloscope is the most versatile; it lets you “see”
voltages versus time at one or more points in a circuit. Logic probes
and logic analyzers are special-purpose instruments for troubleshooting
digital circuits. The simple multimeter provides a good way to measure voltage, current, and resistance, often with good precision; however, it responds slowly, and thus it cannot replace the oscilloscope
where changing voltages are of interest. Multimeters are of two varieties: those that indicate measurements on a conventional scale with a
moving pointer, and those that use a digital display.

Multimeters also have one or more batteries in them to power the
resistance measurement. By supplying a small current and measuring
the voltage drop, they measure resistance, with several ranges to cover
values from 1 Ω (or less) to 10 MΩ (or more).

Important: don’t try to measure “the current of a voltage source,” by
sticking the meter across the wall plug; the same applies for ohms. This
is a leading cause of blown-out meters.

Exercise 1.7. What will a 20,000 Ω/V meter read, on its 1 V
scale, when attached to a 1 V source with an internal resistance
of 10k? What will it read when attached to a 10k–10k voltage
divider driven by a “stiff” (zero source resistance) 1 V source?

The traditional (and now largely obsolete) VOM (volt-ohmmilliammeter) multimeter uses a meter movement that measures current (typically 50 μA full scale). (See a less-design-oriented electronics
book for pretty pictures of the innards of meter movements; for our
purposes, it suffices to say that it uses coils and magnets.) To measure
voltage, the VOM puts a resistor in series with the basic movement.
For instance, one kind of VOM will generate a 1 V (full-scale) range
by putting a 20k resistor in series with the standard 50 μA movement;
higher voltage ranges use correspondingly larger resistors. Such a VOM
is specified as 20,000 Ω/V, meaning that it looks like a resistor whose
value is 20k multiplied by the full-scale voltage of the particular range
selected. Full scale on any voltage range is 1/20,000 amps, or 50 μA.
It should be clear that one of these voltmeters disturbs a circuit less
on a higher range, since it looks like a higher resistance (think of the
voltmeter as the lower leg of a voltage divider, with the Th´evenin resistance of the circuit you are measuring as the upper resistor). Ideally, a
voltmeter should have infinite input resistance.

Exercise 1.8. A 50 μA meter movement has an internal resistance of 5k. What shunt resistance is needed to convert it to a
0–1 A meter? What series resistance will convert it to a 0–10 V
meter?

Most contemporary multimeters use electronic amplification and
have an input resistance of 10 MΩ to 1000 MΩ when measuring voltage; they display their results digitally, and are known collectively as
digital multimeters (DMMs). A word of caution: sometimes the input
resistance of these meters is very high on the most sensitive ranges,
dropping to a lower resistance for the higher ranges. For instance, you
might typically have an input resistance of 109 Ω on the 0.2 V and 2 V
ranges, and 107 Ω on all higher ranges. Read the specifications carefully! However, for most circuit measurements these high input resistances will produce negligible loading effects. In any case, it is easy to
calculate how serious the effect is by using the voltage-divider equation.
Typically, multimeters provide voltage ranges from a volt (or less) to a
kilovolt (or more), full scale.

A multimeter usually includes current-measuring capability, with a

Exercise 1.9. The very high internal resistance of digital multimeters, in their voltage-measuring ranges, can be used to measure extremely low currents (even though the DMM may not
offer a low current range explicitly). Suppose, for example, you
want to measure the small current that flows through a 1000 MΩ
“leakage” resistance (that term is used to describe a small current that ideally should be absent entirely, for example through
the insulation of an underground cable). You have available a
standard DMM, whose 2 V dc range has 10 MΩ internal resistance, and you have available a dc source of +10 V. How can
you use what you’ve got to measure accurately the leakage resistance?

drop for a given load resistance: use the Th´evenin equivalent circuit, attach a load, and calculate the new output,
noting that the new circuit is nothing but a voltage divider
(Figure 1.12).

Exercise 1.10. For the circuit shown in Figure 1.12, with

Vin=30 V and R1 = R2 = 10k, find (a) the output voltage with
no load attached (the open-circuit voltage); (b) the output voltage
with a 10k load (treat as a voltage divider, with R2 and Rload combined into a single resistor); (c) the Th´evenin equivalent circuit;
(d) the same as in part (b), but using the Th´evenin equivalent circuit [again, you wind up with a voltage divider; the answer should
agree with the result in part (b)]; (e) the power dissipated in each
of the resistors.

13 This is the opposite of an ideal voltage-measuring meter, which should
present infinite resistance across its input terminals.
14 A special class of current meters known as electrometers operate with
very small voltage burdens (as little at 0.1 mV) by using the technique
of feedback, something we’ll learn about in Chapters 2 and 4.

A. Equivalent source resistance and circuit loading
As we have just seen, a voltage divider powered from some
fixed voltage is equivalent to some smaller voltage source
