Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.7.1. Frequency analysis of reactive circuits
41

is

I(t) = C dV

dt = CωV0 cosωt,

i.e., a current of amplitude ωCV0, with its phase leading the
input voltage by 90◦. If we consider amplitudes only, and
disregard phases, the current is

I =
V
1/ωC .

waveforms. As an example, a certain “boom-box” loudspeaker might have the frequency response shown in
Figure 1.87, in which the “output” in this case is of course
sound pressure, not voltage. It is desirable for a speaker
to have a “flat” response, meaning that the graph of sound
pressure versus frequency is constant over the band of
audible frequencies. In this case the speaker’s deficiencies
can be corrected by the introduction of a passive filter with
the inverse response (as shown) within the amplifiers of
the radio.

(Recall that ω = 2π f.) It behaves like a frequencydependent resistance R = 1/ωC, but in addition the current
is 90◦out of phase with the voltage (Figure 1.89).

I(t)

V(t) = V0 sin ωt

As we will see, it is possible to generalize Ohm’s
law, replacing the word “resistance” with “impedance,” in
order to describe any circuit containing these linear passive
devices (resistors, capacitors, and inductors). You could
think of the subject of impedance (generalized resistance)
as Ohm’s law for circuits that include capacitors and
inductors.

C

Figure 1.88. A sinusoidal ac voltage drives a capacitor.

I

t

V

t

Figure 1.89. Current in a capacitor leads the sinusoidal voltage by
90◦.

Some terminology: impedance (Z) is the “generalized
resistance”; inductors and capacitors, for which the voltage and current are always 90◦out of phase, are reactive;
they have reactance (X). Resistors, with voltage and current always in phase, are resistive; they have resistance (R).
In general, in a circuit that combines resistive and reactive
components, the voltage and current at some place will
have some in-between phase relationship, described by a
complex impedance: impedance = resistance + reactance,
or Z = R + jX (more about this later).36 However, you’ll
see statements like “the impedance of the capacitor at this
frequency is . . . ” The reason you don’t have to use the word
“reactance” in such a case is that impedance covers everything. In fact, you frequently use the word “impedance”
even when you know it’s a resistance you’re talking about;
you say “the source impedance” or “the output impedance”
when you mean the Th´evenin equivalent resistance of some
source. The same holds for “input impedance.”

For example, a 1 μF capacitor put across the 115 volts
(rms) 60 Hz powerline draws a current of rms amplitude:

I =
115
1/(2π ×60×10−6) = 43.4mA (rms).

In all that follows, we will be talking about circuits
driven by sinewaves at a single frequency. Analysis of circuits driven by complicated waveforms is more elaborate,
involving the methods we used earlier (differential equations) or decomposition of the waveform into sinewaves
(Fourier analysis). Fortunately, these methods are seldom
necessary.

1.7.1 Frequency analysis of reactive circuits

Let’s start by looking at a capacitor driven by a sinewave
voltage source V(t) = V0 sinωt (Figure 1.88). The current

Soon enough we will complicate matters by explicitly
worrying about phase shifts and the like – and that will get
us into some complex algebra that terrifies beginners (often) and mathophobes (always). Before we do that, though,
this is a good time to develop intuition about the frequencydependent behavior of some basic and important circuits
that use capacitors, ignoring for the time being the troublesome fact that, when driven with a sinusoidal signal, currents and voltages in a capacitor are not in phase.

36 But, in a nutshell, the magnitude of Z gives the ratio of amplitudes
of voltage to current, and the polar angle of Z gives the phase angle
between current and voltage.

As we just saw, the ratio of magnitudes of voltage to
