Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.9.3. Connectors
59

+12V

buzzer

excitation, and coil voltages from 3 volts up to 115 volts
(ac or dc) are common. “Mercury-wetted” and “reed” relays are intended for high-speed (∼1 ms) applications, and
giant relays intended to switch thousands of amps are used
by power companies.

seat

right
door
left
door

Figure 1.121. Switch circuit example: open door warning.

The solid-state relay (SSR) – consisting of a semiconductor electronic switch that is turned on by a LED – provides better performance and reliability than mechanical
relays, though at greater cost. SSRs operate rapidly, without contact “bounce,” and usually provide for smart switching of ac power (they turn on at the moment of zero voltage, and they turn off at the moment of zero current). Much
more on these useful devices in Chapter 12.

Chapters 2, 3, and 10 when we talk about transistors and
digital logic.

Figure 1.122 shows a classic switch circuit used to turn
a ceiling lamp on or off from a switch at either of two entrances to a room.

As we’ll learn, electrically controlled switching of signals within a circuit can be accomplished with transistor
switches, without having to use relays of any sort (Chapters 2 and 3). The primary uses of relays are in remote
switching and high-voltage (or high-current) switching,
where it is important to have complete electrical isolation
between the control signal and the circuit being switched.

1.9.3 Connectors

115Vac

Figure 1.122. Electrician’s “three-way” switch wiring.

Bringing signals in and out of an instrument, routing signal
and dc power around between the various parts of an instrument, providing flexibility by permitting circuit boards
and larger modules of the instrument to be unplugged (and
replaced) – these are the functions of the connector, an essential ingredient (and usually the most unreliable part) of
any piece of electronic equipment. Connectors come in a
bewildering variety of sizes and shapes.52 Figures 1.123,
1.124, and 1.125 give some idea of the variety.

Exercise 1.36. Although few electronic circuit designers know
how, every electrician can wire up a light fixture so that any of
N switches can turn it on or off. See if you can figure out this
generalization of Figure 1.122. It requires two SPDT switches
and N−2 DPDT switches.

1.9.2 Electromechanical devices: relays

A. Single-wire connectors
The simplest kind of connector is the simple pin jack or
banana jack used on multimeters, power supplies, etc. It is
handy and inexpensive, but not as useful as the shieldedcable or multiwire connectors you often need. The humble
binding post is another form of single-wire connector, notable for the clumsiness it inspires in those who try to use
it.

Relays are electrically controlled switches. In the traditional electromechanical relay, a coil pulls in an armature (to close the contacts) when sufficient coil current
flows. Many varieties are available, including “latching”
and “stepping” relays.51 Relays are available with dc or ac

B. Shielded-cable connectors
To prevent capacitive pickup, and for other reasons we’ll go
into in Appendix H, it is usually desirable to pipe signals
around from one instrument to another in shielded coaxial
cable. The most popular connector is the BNC type that

52 A search for “connector” on the DigiKey website returns 116 categories, with approximately 43,000 individual varieties in stock.

51 In an amusing historical footnote, the stepping relay used for a century
as the cornerstone of telephone exchanges (the “Strowger selector”)
was invented by a Topeka undertaker, Almon Strowger, evidently because he suspected that telephone calls intended for his business were
being routed (by the switchboard operators in his town) to a funeral
home competitor.
