12
1.2. Voltage, current, and resistance
Art of Electronics Third Edition

through a resistor from a higher voltage available somewhere in the circuit, as in Figure 1.16.

I

Lest this example leave the wrong impression, we
would like to emphasize again that circuits are ordinarily
designed so that the load resistance is much greater than
the source resistance of the signal that drives the load.

1mA
1k

1.2.6 Small-signal resistance

4k

1V
V

A.

I

diode
conduction

We often deal with electronic devices for which I is not
proportional to V; in such cases there’s not much point in
talking about resistance, since the ratio V/I will depend on
V, rather than being a nice constant, independent of V. For
these devices it is sometimes useful to know instead the
slope of the V–I curve, in other words, the ratio of a small
change in applied voltage to the resulting change in current through the device, ΔV/ΔI (or dV/dI). This quantity
has the units of resistance (ohms) and substitutes for resistance in many calculations. It is called the small-signal
resistance, incremental resistance, or dynamic resistance.

V

real
zener

ideal
zener
B.

Figure 1.15. I–V curves: A. Resistor (linear). B. Zener diode (nonlinear).

+
+
R

Vin
Vout

Figure 1.16. Zener regulator.

Then,

I = Vin −Vout

R
and

A. Zener diodes
As an example, consider the zener diode, which has the
I–V curve shown in Figure 1.15. Zeners are used to create a constant voltage inside a circuit somewhere, simply
done by providing them with a (roughly constant) current
derived from a higher voltage within the circuit.17 For example, the zener diode in Figure 1.15 will convert an applied current in the range shown to a corresponding (but
fractionally narrower) range of voltages. It is important to
know how the resulting zener voltage will change with applied current; this is a measure of its “regulation” against
changes in the driving current provided to it. Included in
the specifications of a zener will be its dynamic resistance,
given at a certain current. For example, a zener might have
a dynamic resistance of 10 Ω at 10 mA, at its specified
zener voltage of 5 V. Using the definition of dynamic resistance, we find that a 10% change in applied current will
therefore result in a change in voltage of

ΔI = ΔVin −ΔVout

ΔV = RdynΔI = 10×0.1×0.01 = 10mV

R
,

so

or

ΔVout = RdynΔI = Rdyn

ΔV/V = 0.002 = 0.2%,

R (ΔVin −ΔVout)

and finally

thus demonstrating good voltage-regulating ability. In this
sort of application you frequently get the zener current

ΔVin.

ΔVout =
Rdyn
R+Rdyn

17 Zeners belong to the more general class of diodes and rectifiers, important devices that we’ll see later in the chapter (§1.6), and indeed
throughout the book. The ideal diode (or rectifier) acts as a perfect
conductor for current flow in one direction, and a perfect insulator for
current flow in the reverse direction; it is a “one-way valve” for current.

Aha – the voltage-divider equation, again! Thus, for
changes in voltage, the circuit behaves like a voltage divider, with the zener replaced by a resistor equal to its
dynamic resistance at the operating current. This is the
