FOUNDATIONS

CHAPTER 1

1.1 Introduction

electronic circuits. Because you can’t touch, see, smell, or
hear electricity, there will be a certain amount of abstraction (particularly in the first chapter), as well as some dependence on such visualizing instruments as oscilloscopes
and voltmeters. In many ways the first chapter is also the
most mathematical, in spite of our efforts to keep mathematics to a minimum in order to foster a good intuitive
understanding of circuit design and behavior.

In this new edition we’ve included some intuition-aiding
approximations that our students have found helpful. And,
by introducing one or two “active” components ahead of
their time, we’re able to jump directly into some applications that are usually impossible in a traditional textbook
“passive electronics” chapter; this will keep things interesting, and even exciting.

Once we have considered the foundations of electronics, we will quickly get into the active circuits (amplifiers,
oscillators, logic circuits, etc.) that make electronics the exciting field it is. The reader with some background in electronics may wish to skip over this chapter, since it assumes
no prior knowledge of electronics. Further generalizations
at this time would be pointless, so let’s just dive right in.

The field of electronics is one of the great success stories
of the 20th century. From the crude spark-gap transmitters
and “cat’s-whisker” detectors at its beginning, the first halfcentury brought an era of vacuum-tube electronics that developed considerable sophistication and found ready application in areas such as communications, navigation, instrumentation, control, and computation. The latter halfcentury brought “solid-state” electronics – first as discrete
transistors, then as magnificent arrays of them within “integrated circuits” (ICs) – in a flood of stunning advances
that shows no sign of abating. Compact and inexpensive
consumer products now routinely contain many millions
of transistors in VLSI (very large-scale integration) chips,
combined with elegant optoelectronics (displays, lasers,
and so on); they can process sounds, images, and data, and
(for example) permit wireless networking and shirt-pocket
access to the pooled capabilities of the Internet. Perhaps as
noteworthy is the pleasant trend toward increased performance per dollar.1 The cost of an electronic microcircuit
routinely decreases to a fraction of its initial cost as the
manufacturing process is perfected (see Figure 10.87 for
an example). In fact, it is often the case that the panel controls and cabinet hardware of an instrument cost more than
the electronics inside.

1.2 Voltage, current, and resistance
1.2.1 Voltage and current

There are two quantities that we like to keep track of in
electronic circuits: voltage and current. These are usually
changing with time; otherwise nothing interesting is happening.

Voltage (symbol V or sometimes E). Officially, the volt-

On reading of these exciting new developments in electronics, you may get the impression that you should be able
to construct powerful, elegant, yet inexpensive, little gadgets to do almost any conceivable task – all you need to
know is how all these miracle devices work. If you’ve had
that feeling, this book is for you. In it we have attempted
to convey the excitement and know-how of the subject of
electronics.

age between two points is the cost in energy (work done)
required to move a unit of positive charge from the more
negative point (lower potential) to the more positive
point (higher potential). Equivalently, it is the energy
released when a unit charge moves “downhill” from
the higher potential to the lower.2 Voltage is also called

In this chapter we begin the study of the laws, rules of
thumb, and tricks that constitute the art of electronics as we
see it. It is necessary to begin at the beginning – with talk of
voltage, current, power, and the components that make up

1 A mid-century computer (the IBM 650) cost $300,000, weighed 2.7
tons, and contained 126 lamps on its control panel; in an amusing reversal, a contemporary energy-efficient lamp contains a computer of
greater capability within its base, and costs about $10.

2 These are the definitions, but hardly the way circuit designers think of
voltage. With time, you’ll develop a good intuitive sense of what voltage really is, in an electronic circuit. Roughly (very roughly) speaking,
voltages are what you apply to cause currents to flow.

1
