Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.2.2. Relationship between voltage and current: resistors
5

ceramic-composition moldings; from metal foil or metal
wire wound on a form; or from semiconductor elements
similar to field-effect transistors (FETs). The most commonly used resistor type is formed from a carbon, metal,
or oxide film, and comes in two widely used “packages”:
the cylindrical axial-lead type (typified by the generic
RN55D 1% 1/4 W metal-film resistor),8 and the much
smaller surface-mount “chip resistor.” These common
types come in 5%, 2%, and 1% tolerances, in a standard
set of values ranging from 1 Ω to 10 MΩ. The 1% types
have 96 values per decade, whereas the 2% and 5% types
have 48 and 24 values per decade (see Appendix C). Figure 1.2 illustrates most of the common resistor packages.

RESISTORS
Resistors are truly ubiquitous. There are almost as many
types as there are applications. Resistors are used in amplifiers as loads for active devices, in bias networks, and
as feedback elements. In combination with capacitors
they establish time constants and act as filters. They are
used to set operating currents and signal levels. Resistors
are used in power circuits to reduce voltages by dissipating power, to measure currents, and to discharge capacitors after power is removed. They are used in precision circuits to establish currents, to provide accurate
voltage ratios, and to set precise gain values. In logic circuits they act as bus and line terminators and as “pullup”
and “pull-down” resistors. In high-voltage circuits they
are used to measure voltages and to equalize leakage currents among diodes or capacitors connected in series. In
radiofrequency (RF) circuits they set the bandwidth of
resonant circuits, and they are even used as coil forms
for inductors.

Resistors are so easy to use and well behaved that
they’re often taken for granted. They’re not perfect,
though, and you should be aware of some of their limitations so that you won’t be surprised someday. The principal defects are variations in resistance with temperature,
voltage, time, and humidity. Other defects relate to inductance (which may be serious at high frequencies), the
development of thermal hot spots in power applications,
or electrical noise generation in low-noise amplifiers. We
treat these in the advanced Chapter 1x.

Resistors are available with resistances from 0.0002 Ω
through 1012 Ω, standard power ratings from 1/8 watt
through 250 watts, and accuracies from 0.005% through
20%. Resistors can be made from metal films, metaloxide films, or carbon films; from carbon-composition or

R1
R2

voltage to a current, and vice versa. This may sound awfully trite, but you will soon see what we mean.

Figure 1.4. Resistors in series.

B. Resistors in series and parallel
From the definition of R, some simple results follow:

R1

1. The resistance of two resistors in series (Figure 1.4) is

R2

R = R1 +R2.
(1.3)

Figure 1.5. Resistors in parallel.

By putting resistors in series, you always get a larger resistor.
2. The resistance of two resistors in parallel (Figure 1.5) is

resistor as a 1M resistor (or 1 meg).9 If these preliminaries
bore you, please have patience – we’ll soon get to numerous amusing applications.

.
(1.4)

R =
R1R2
R1 +R2

+ 1

or
R =
1
1
R1

R2

Exercise 1.1. You have a 5k resistor and a 10k resistor. What is
their combined resistance (a) in series and (b) in parallel?

Exercise 1.2. If you place a 1 ohm resistor across a 12 volt car
battery, how much power will it dissipate?

Exercise 1.3. Prove the formulas for series and parallel resistors.

By putting resistors in parallel, you always get a smaller
resistor. Resistance is measured in ohms (Ω), but in practice we frequently omit the Ω symbol when referring to
resistors that are more than 1000 Ω (1 kΩ). Thus, a 4.7 kΩ
resistor is often referred to as a 4.7k resistor, and a 1 MΩ

8 Conservatively rated at 1/8 watt in its RN55 military grade (“MILspec”), but rated at 1/4 watt in its CMF-55 industrial grade.

9 A popular “international” alternative notation replaces the decimal
point with the unit multiplier, thus 4k7 or 1M0. A 2.2 Ω resistor becomes 2R2. There is an analogous scheme for capacitors and inductors.
