46
1.7. Impedance and reactance
Art of Electronics Third Edition

a real part to the impedance. The term “reactance” in that
case means the imaginary part only.

we’ll analyze (correctly, this time) the simple but extremely
important and useful RC lowpass and highpass filter circuits.

1.7.5 Ohm’s law generalized

Imagine putting a 1 μF capacitor across a 115 volts
(rms) 60 Hz powerline. What current flows? Using complex Ohm’s law, we have

With these conventions for representing voltages and currents, Ohm’s law takes a simple form. It reads simply

Z = −j/ωC.

I = V/Z,

Therefore, the current is given by

V = IZ,

I = V/Z.

√

The phase of the voltage is arbitrary, so let us choose V =
A, i.e., V(t) = Acosωt, where the amplitude A = 115

where the voltage represented by V is applied across a circuit of impedance Z, giving a current represented by I. The
complex impedance of devices in series or parallel obeys
the same rules as resistance:

2 ≈
163 volts. Then

Z = Z1 +Z2 +Z3 +···
(series),
(1.30)

I = jωCA ≈−0.061sinωt.

(parallel).
(1.31)

+···

+ 1

+ 1

Z =
1
1
Z1

Z2

Z3

Finally, for completeness we summarize here the formulas
for the impedance of resistors, capacitors, and inductors:

ZR = R
(resistor),

(1.32)

ZC = −j/ωC = 1/jωC (capacitor),

The resulting current has an amplitude of 61 mA (43 mA
rms) and leads the voltage by 90◦. This agrees with our
previous calculation. More simply, we could have noticed
that the impedance of the capacitor is negative imaginary,
so whatever the absolute phase of V, the phase of Icap must
lead by 90◦. And in general the phase angle between current and voltage, for any two-terminal RLC circuit, is equal
to the angle of the (complex) impedance of that circuit.

ZL = jωL
(inductor).

Note that if we wanted to know just the magnitude of
the current, and didn’t care what the relative phase was, we
could have avoided doing any complex algebra: if

A = B/C,

then

A = B/C,

where A, B, and C are the magnitudes of the respective
complex numbers; this holds for multiplication, also (see
Exercise 1.18). Thus, in this case,

With these rules we can analyze many ac circuits by the
same general methods we used in handling dc circuits, i.e.,
application of the series and parallel formulas and Ohm’s
law. Our results for circuits such as voltage dividers will
look nearly the same as before. For multiply-connected
networks we may have to use Kirchhoff’s laws, just as with
dc circuits, in this case using the complex representations
for V and I: the sum of the (complex) voltage drops around
a closed loop is zero, and the sum of the (complex) currents into a point is zero. The latter rule implies, as with dc
circuits, that the (complex) current in a series circuit is the
same everywhere.

I = V/Z = ωCV.

This trick, which we used earlier (because we didn’t know
any better), is often useful.

Exercise 1.25. Use the preceding rules for the impedance of devices in parallel and in series to derive the formulas (1.17) and
(1.18) for the capacitance of two capacitors (a) in parallel and (b)
in series. Hint: in each case, let the individual capacitors have capacitancesC1 andC2. Write down the impedance of the parallel or
series combination; then equate it to the impedance of a capacitor
with capacitance C. Then find C.

Surprisingly, there is no power dissipated by the capacitor in this example. Such activity won’t increase your electric bill; you’ll see why in the next section. Then we will
go on to look at circuits containing resistors and capacitors
with our complex Ohm’s law.

Exercise 1.26. Show that, if A = BC, then A = BC, where A, B,
and C are magnitudes. Hint: represent each complex number in
polar form, i.e., A = Aeiθ.

Let’s try out these techniques on the simplest circuit
imaginable, an ac voltage applied across a capacitor, which
we looked at earlier, in §1.7.1. Then, after a brief look at
power in reactive circuits (to finish laying the groundwork),
