22
1.4. Capacitors and ac circuits
Art of Electronics Third Edition

V

Vf

63%

Vout = Vf (1 – e–t/RC)

A. Time constant
The product RC is called the time constant of the circuit.
For R in ohms andC in farads, the product RC is in seconds.
A microfarad across 1.0k has a time constant of 1 ms; if the
capacitor is initially charged to 1.0 V, the initial current is
1.0 mA.

0

t
t = RC

R

Vout
+

Figure 1.34. RC charging waveform.

C
battery,
voltage = Vf

Vin

Figure 1.33. RC charging circuit.

t

(lower frequency)

Vout

Figure 1.33 shows a slightly different circuit. At time
t = 0, someone connects the battery. The equation for the
circuit is then

I = C dV

dt = Vf −Vout

R
,

t

with the solution

Vout = Vf +Ae−t/RC.

Figure 1.35. Output (lower waveforms) across a capacitor, when
driven by square waves through a resistor.

within 1% of its final value in five time constants.) If we
then change the battery voltage to some other value (say,
0 V), V will decay toward that new value with an exponential e−t/RC. For example, replacing the battery’s step input
from 0 to +Vf with a square-wave input Vin(t) would produce the output shown in Figure 1.35.

(Please don’t worry if you can’t follow the mathematics.
What we are doing is getting some important results, which
you should remember. Later we will use the results often, with no further need for the mathematics used to derive them. For readers whose knowledge of math is somewhat, uh, rusty, the brief review in Appendix A may prove
helpful.) The constant A is determined by initial conditions
(Figure 1.34): V = 0 at t = 0; therefore, A = −Vf, and

Vout = Vf (1−e−t/RC).
(1.21)

Exercise 1.16. Show that the rise time (the time required for going
from 10% to 90% of its final value) of this signal is 2.2RC.

You might ask the obvious next question: what about
V(t) for arbitrary Vin(t)? The solution involves an inhomogeneous differential equation and can be solved by standard methods (which are, however, beyond the scope of
this book). You would find

 t

Once again there’s good intuition: as the capacitor charges
up, the slope (which is proportional to current, because it’s
a capacitor) is proportional to the remaining voltage (because that’s what appears across the resistor, producing the
current); so we have a waveform whose slope decreases
proportionally to the vertical distance it has still to go – an
exponential.

V(t) = 1

RC

−∞Vin(τ)e−(t−τ)/RCdτ.

That is, the RC circuit averages past history at the input
with a weighting factor of

You can turn around the last equation to figure out the
time required to reach a voltage V on the way to the final
voltage Vf. Try it! (Refer to Appendix A if you need help
with logarithms.) You should get

e−Δt/RC.



(1.22)

t = RC loge


Vf
Vf −V

B. Decay to equilibrium
Eventually (when t ≫RC), V reaches Vf. (Presenting the
“5RC rule of thumb”: a capacitor charges or decays to

In practice, you seldom ask this question. Instead, you
deal in the frequency domain, in which you ask how much
of each frequency component present in the input gets
through. We will get to this important topic soon (§1.7).
Before we do, though, there are a few other interesting
