58
1.9. Other passive components
Art of Electronics Third Edition

switch, and DPDT indicates a double-pole double-throw
switch). Toggle switches are also available with “center

OFF” positions and with up to four poles switched simultaneously. Toggle switches are always “break before make,”
e.g., the moving contact never connects to both terminals
in an SPDT switch.

codes its position as a 4-bit binary quantity, thereby saving
lots of wires (only five are needed: the four bits, and a common line). An alternative is the use of a rotary encoder, an
electromechanical panel-mounting device that creates a sequence of N pulse pairs for each full rotation of the knob.
These come in two flavors (internally using either mechanical contacts or electro-optical methods), and typically provide from 16 to 200 pulse pairs per revolution. The optical
varieties cost more, but they last forever.

SPDT
SPST

DPDT

Figure 1.119. Fundamental switch types.

NC

C

NO

form A, NO
form B, NC
form C, SPDT

D. PC-mounting switches
It’s common to see little arrays of switches on printedcircuit (PC) boards, like the ones shown in Figure 1.118.
They’re often called DIP switches, referring to the integrated circuit dual in-line package that they borrow, though
contemporary practice increasingly uses the more compact
surface-mount technology (SMT) package. As the photograph illustrates, you can get coded rotary switches; and
because these are used for set-and-forget internal settings,
you can substitute a multipin header block, with little slideon “shunts” to make the connections.

Figure 1.120. Momentary-contact (pushbutton) switches.

B. Pushbutton switches
Pushbutton switches are useful for momentary-contact applications; they are drawn schematically as shown in Figure 1.120 (NO and NC mean normally open and normally
closed). For SPDT momentary-contact switches, the terminals must be labeled NO and NC, whereas for SPST
types the symbol is self-explanatory. Momentary-contact
switches are always “break before make.” In the electrical
(as opposed to electronic) industry, the terms form A, form
B, and form C are used to mean SPST (NO), SPST (NC),
and SPDT, respectively.

E. Other switch types
In addition to these basic switch types, there are available
various exotic switches such as Hall-effect switches, reed
switches, proximity switches, etc. All switches carry maximum current and voltage ratings; a small toggle switch
might be rated at 150 volts and 5 amps. Operation with
inductive loads drastically reduces switch life because of
arcing during turn-off. It’s always OK to operate a switch
below its maximum ratings, with one notable exception:
since many switches rely on substantial current flow to
clean away contact oxides, it’s important to use a switch
that is designed for “dry switching” when switching lowlevel signals;50 otherwise you’ll get noisy and intermittent
operation (see Chapter 1x).

C. Rotary switches
Rotary switches are available with many poles and many
positions, often as kits with individual wafers and shaft
hardware. Both shorting (make-before-break) and nonshorting (break-before-make) types are available, and they
can be mixed on the same switch. In many applications the
shorting type is useful to prevent an open circuit between
switch positions, because circuits can go amok with unconnected inputs. Nonshorting types are necessary if the
separate lines being switched to one common line must not
ever be connected to each other.

F. Switch examples
As an example of what can be done with simple switches,
let’s consider the following problem: suppose you want to
sound a warning buzzer if the driver of a car is seated and
one of the car doors is open. Both doors and the driver’s
seat have switches, all normally open. Figure 1.121 shows
a circuit that does what you want. If one OR the other
door is open (switch closed) AND the seat switch is closed,
the buzzer sounds. The words OR and AND are used in a
logic sense here, and we will see this example again in

50 These use gold contact plating.

Sometimes you don’t really want all those poles, you
just want to know how many clicks (detents) the shaft has
been turned. For that a common form of rotary switch en-
