18
1.4. Capacitors and ac circuits
Art of Electronics Third Edition

+

several modes (linear or logarithmic frequency variation
versus time). They are available with pulse outputs (although not with the flexibility you get with a pulse generator), and some of them have provision for modulation.

Figure 1.27. Capacitors. The curved electrode indicates the negative terminal of a polarized capacitor, or the “outer foil” of a
wrapped-film capacitor.

tions of the treatment that follows are necessarily mathematical in nature; the reader with little mathematical preparation may find the math review in Appendix A helpful. In
any case, an understanding of the details is less important
in the long run than an understanding of the results.

1.4.1 Capacitors

A capacitor (Figure 1.27) (the old-fashioned name was
condenser) is a device that has two wires sticking out of
it and has the property

Q = CV.
(1.13)

Traditional function generators used analog circuitry,
but contemporary models generally are synthesized digital function generators, exhibiting all the flexibility of
a function generator along with the stability and accuracy of a frequency synthesizer. In addition, they let you
program an “arbitrary” waveform, specifying the amplitude at a set of equally spaced points. An example is
the Tektronix AFG3102, with a lower frequency limit of
1 microhertz, which can make sine and square waves to
100 MHz, pulses and “noise” to 50 MHz, and arbitrary
waveforms (up to 128k points) to 50 MHz. It has modulation (five kinds), sweep (linear and log), and burst modes (1
to 106 cycles), and everything is programmable, including
frequency, pulse width and rise times, modulation, and amplitude (20 mV to 10 Vpp); it even includes some bizarre
built-in waveforms such as sin(x)/x, exponential rise and
fall, Gaussian, and Lorentzian. It has two independent outputs and costs about $5k. For general use, if you can have
only one signal source, the function generator is for you.

1.4 Capacitors and ac circuits

Its basic form is a pair of closely-spaced metal plates,
separated by some insulating material, as in the rolledup “axial-film capacitor” of Figure 1.28. A capacitor of C
farads with V volts across its terminals has Q coulombs of
stored charge on one plate and −Q on the other. The capacitance is proportional to the area and inversely proportional
to the spacing. For the simple parallel-plate capacitor, with
separation d and plate area A (and with the spacing d much
less than the dimensions of the plates), the capacitance C is
given by

C = 8.85×10−14 εA/d F,
(1.14)

where ε is the dielectric constant of the insulator, and the
dimensions are measured in centimeters. It takes a lot of
area, and tiny spacing, to make the sort of capacitances
commonly used in circuits.21 For example, a pair of 1 cm2

Once we enter the world of changing voltages and currents,
or “signals,” we encounter two very interesting circuit
elements that are useless in purely dc circuits: capacitors
and inductors. As you will see, these humble devices,
combined with resistors, complete the triad of passive
linear circuit elements that form the basis of nearly all
circuitry.20 Capacitors, in particular, are essential in nearly
every circuit application. They are used for waveform
generation, filtering, and blocking and bypass applications.
They are used in integrators and differentiators. In combination with inductors, they make possible sharp filters
for separating desired signals from background. You will
see some of these applications as we continue with this
chapter, and there will be numerous interesting examples
in later chapters.

Let’s proceed, then, to look at capacitors in detail. Por-

plates separated by 1 mm is a capacitor of slightly less than
10−12 F (a picofarad); you’d need 100,000 of them just to
create the 0.1 μF capacitor of Figure 1.28 (which is nothing
special; we routinely use capacitors with many microfarads
of capacitance). Ordinarily you don’t need to calculate capacitances, because you buy a capacitor as an electronic
component.

To a first approximation, capacitors are devices that
might be considered simply frequency-dependent resistors.

21 And it doesn’t hurt to have a high dielectric constant, as well: air has
ε=1, but plastic films have ε=2.1 (polypropylene) or 3.1 (polyester).
And certain ceramics are popular among capacitor makers: ε=45
(“C0G” type) or 3000 (“X7R” type).

20 Readers of the scientific journal Nature (London) were greeted,
in 2008, with an article titled “The missing memristor found”
(D. B. Strukov et al., 453, 80, 2008), purporting to have found a heretofore missing “fourth fundamental [passive circuit] element.” We are
skeptical. However the controversy is ultimately resolved, it should be
noted that the memristor is a nonlinear element; there are only three
linear passive 2-terminal circuit elements.
