44
1.7. Impedance and reactance
Art of Electronics Third Edition

of capacitance and frequency, giving the value of XC =
1/2π fC.

the first stage is highpass with a breakpoint of 100 Hz, and the
second stage is lowpass with a breakpoint of 10 kHz. Assume the
input signal source has an impedance of 100Ω. What is the worstcase output impedance of your filter, and therefore what is the
minimum recommended load impedance?

1.7.2 Reactance of inductors

D. Driving and loading RC filters
This example of an audio-blocking capacitor raised the issue of driving and loading RC filter circuits. As we discussed in §1.2.5A, in the context of voltage dividers, you
generally like to arrange things so that the circuit being driven does not significantly load the driving resistance (Th´evenin equivalent source resistance) of the signal
source.

Before we embark on a fully correct treatment of
impedance, replete with complex exponentials and the like,
let’s use our approximation tricks to figure out the reactance of an inductor.

It goes as before: we imagine an inductor L driven by
a sinusoidal voltage source of angular frequency ω such
that a current I(t) = I0 sinωt is flowing.40 Then the voltage
across the inductor is

V(t) = LdI(t)

dt
= LωI0 cosωt.

The same logic applies here, but with a generalized
kind of resistance that includes the reactance of capacitors
(and inductors), known as impedance. So a signal source’s
impedance should generally be small compared with the
impedance of the thing being driven.39 We’ll have a precise way of talking about impedance shortly, but it’s correct to say that, apart from phase shifts, the impedance of a
capacitor is equal to its reactance.

And so the ratio of magnitudes of voltage to current – the
resistance-like quantity called reactance – is just

|V|

= ωL.

|I| = LωI0

I0

So. for an inductor,

What we want to know, then, are the input and output impedances of the two simple RC filters (lowpass and
highpass). This sounds complicated, because there are four
impedances, and they all vary with frequency. However, if
you ask the question the right way, the answer is simple,
and the same in all cases!

XL = ωL.
(1.29)

Inductors, like capacitors, have a frequency-dependent
reactance; however, here the reactance increases with increasing frequency (the opposite of capacitors, where it
decreases with increasing frequency). So, in the simplest
view, a series inductor can be used to pass dc and low frequencies (where its reactance is small) while blocking high
frequencies (where its reactance is high). You often see inductors used this way, particularly in circuits that operate
at radio frequencies; in that application they’re sometimes
called chokes.

First, assume that in each case the right thing is being
done to the other end of the filter: when we ask the input
impedance, we assume the output drives a high impedance
(compared with its own); and when we ask the output
impedance, we assume the input is driven by a signal
source of low internal (Th´evenin) impedance. Second, we
dispose of the variation of impedances with frequency by
asking only for the worst-case value; that is, we care what
only the maximum output impedance of a filter circuit may
be (because that is the worst for driving a load), and we care
about only the minimum input impedance (because that is
the hardest to drive).

1.7.3 Voltages and currents as complex numbers

Now the answer is astonishingly simple: in all cases the
worst-case impedance is just R.

Exercise 1.23. Show that the preceding statement is correct.

At this point it is necessary to get into some complex algebra; you may wish to skip over the math in some of the
following sections, taking note of the results as we derive
them. A knowledge of the detailed mathematics is not necessary for understanding the remainder of the book. Very
little mathematics will be used in later chapters. The section ahead is easily the most difficult for the reader with
little mathematical preparation. Don’t be discouraged!

So, for example, if you want to hang an RC lowpass filter onto the output of an amplifier whose output resistance
is 100 Ω, start with R = 1k, then choose C for the breakpoint you want. Be sure that whatever loads the output has
an input impedance of at least 10k. You can’t go wrong.

As we’ve just seen, there can be phase shifts between

Exercise 1.24. Design a two-stage “bandpass” RC filter, in which

39 With two important exceptions, namely, transmission lines and current
sources.

40 We take the easy path here by specifying the current, rather than the
voltage; we are rewarded with a simple derivative (rather than a simple
integral!).
