64
1.10. A parting shot: confusing markings and itty-bitty components
Art of Electronics Third Edition

Figure 1.128. Variable capacitor.

B. Variable capacitors
Variable capacitors are primarily confined to the smaller
capacitance values (up to about 1000 pF) and are commonly used in RF circuits. Trimmers are available for incircuit adjustments, in addition to the panel type for user
tuning. Figure 1.128 shows the symbol for a variable capacitor.

Diodes operated with applied reverse voltage can be
used as voltage-variable capacitors; in this application
they’re called varactors, or sometimes varicaps or epicaps. They’re very important in RF applications, especially
phase-locked loops, automatic frequency control (AFC),
modulators, and parametric amplifiers.

Figure 1.129. A powerline variable transformer (“Variac”) lets you
adjust the ac input voltage to something you are testing. Here a 5 A
unit is shown, both clothed and undressed.

1.10 A parting shot: confusing markings and
itty-bitty components

C. Variable inductors
Variable inductors are usually made by arranging to move
a piece of core material in a fixed coil. In this form they’re
available with inductances ranging from microhenrys to
henrys, typically with a 2:1 tuning range for any given inductor. Also available are rotary inductors (coreless coils
with a rolling contact).56

In our electronics course,57 and indeed in day-to-day electronics on the bench, we encounter a wonderful confusion
of component markings. Capacitors in particular are just,
well, perverse: they rarely bother specifying units (even
though they span 12 orders of magnitude, picofarads to
farads), and for ceramic SMT varieties they dispense with
any markings whatsoever! Even worse, they are still caught
up in the transition from printing the value as an integer (e.g., “470” meaning 470 pF) versus using exponent
notation (e.g., “470” meaning 47×100, i.e., 47 pF). Figure 1.130 shows exactly that case! Another trap for the unwary (and sometimes the wary, as well) is the date-code
gotcha: the 4-digit code (yydd) can masquerade as a part
number, as in the four examples in the photo. And, as components become smaller and smaller, there’s precious little room for all but the briefest of markings; so, following
the pharmaceutical industry, manufacturers invent a short

D. Variable transformers
Variable transformers are handy devices, especially the
ones operated from the 115 volt ac line. They’re usually
configured as “autotransformers,” which means that they
have only one winding, with a sliding contact. They’re also
commonly called Variacs (the name given to them by General Radio), and they are made by Technipower, Superior
Electric, and others. Figure 1.129 shows a classic unit from
General Radio. Typically they provide 0 to 135 volts ac
output when operated from 115 volts, and they come in current ratings from 1 amp to 20 amps or more. They’re good
for testing instruments that seem to be affected by powerline variations, and in any case to verify worst-case performance. Important Warning: don’t forget that the output is
not electrically isolated from the powerline, as it would be
with a transformer!

57 Physics 123 (“Laboratory Electronics”) at Harvard University: “Half
course (fall term; repeated spring term). A lab-intensive introduction
to electronic circuit design. Develops circuit intuition and debugging
skills through daily hands-on lab exercises, each preceded by class
discussion, with minimal use of mathematics and physics. Moves
quickly from passive circuits, to discrete transistors, then concentrates on operational amplifiers, used to make a variety of circuits
including integrators, oscillators, regulators, and filters. The digital half of the course treats analog–digital interfacing, emphasizing the use of microcontrollers and programmable logic devices
(PLDs).” See http://webdocs.registrar.fas.harvard.edu/

courses/Physics.html.

56 An interesting form of variable inductor of yesteryear was the variometer, a rotatable coil positioned within a fixed outer coil and connected
in series with it. As the inner coil was rotated, the total inductance
went from maximum (four times the inductance of either coil alone)
all the way down to zero. These things were consumer items, listed for
example in the 1925 Sears Roebuck catalog.
