54
1.7. Impedance and reactance
Art of Electronics Third Edition

Q=10

1.0

Q=3

Q=1

0.8

0.6

Q=1

Vout/Vin

0.4

Q=3

0.2

Q=10

0

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Normalized Frequency (f/fo)

Figure 1.110. Response of LC tank (dotted curves) and trap (solid
curves) for several values of quality factor, Q.

Figure 1.111. There are six LC lowpass filters on this circuit board,
part of the process of frequency conversion and digitizing for which
this “mixer-digitizer” was designed.

Exercise 1.35. Find the response (Vout/Vin versus frequency) for
the series LC trap circuit in Figure 1.108.

RF bands; its design could occupy a book chapter. For now
just gaze at the lumpy filter in the oval (there are five more
on the board), comprising three inductors (the square metal
cans) and four capacitors (the pairs of shiny oblongs). It’s
a lowpass filter, designed to cut off at 1.0 MHz; it prevents
‘aliases” in the digitized output, a subject we’ll visit in
Chapter 13.

These descriptions of LC resonant circuits are phrased
in terms of frequency response, i.e., in the frequency domain. In the time domain you’re generally interested in a
circuit’s response to pulses, or steps; there you see the sort
of behavior shown in the inset of Figure 1.107, an LC circuit with Q=20. The signal voltage falls to 1/e (37%) in
Q/π cycles; the stored energy (proportional to v2) falls to
1/e (61% in amplitude) in Q/2π cycles. You may prefer to
think in radians: the energy falls to 1/e in Q radians, and
the voltage falls to 1/e in 2Q radians. LC resonant circuits
are not unique in providing highly frequency-selective circuit behavior; alternatives include quartz-crystal, ceramic,
and surface acoustic-wave (SAW) resonators; transmission
lines; and resonant cavities.

How well does it work? Figure 1.112 shows a “frequency sweep,” in which a sinewave input goes from
0 Hz to 2 MHz as the trace goes from left to right across
the screen. The sausage shapes are the “envelope” of the
sinewave output, here comparing the LC filter with an
RC lowpass filter with the same 1 MHz cutoff (1 kΩ and
160 pF). The LC wins, hands down. The RC is pathetic by
comparison. It’s not even good English to call 1 MHz its
“cutoff”: it hardly cuts anything off.

1.7.16 Other capacitor applications

1.7.15 LC filters

In addition to their uses in filters, resonant circuits, differentiators, and integrators, capacitors are needed for several
other important applications. We treat these in detail later
in the book, mentioning them here only as a preview.

By combining inductors with capacitors you can produce
filters (lowpass, highpass, bandpass) with far sharper behavior in frequency response than you can with a filter
made from a simple RC, or from any number of cascaded
RC sections. We’ll see more of this, and the related topic
of active filters, in Chapter 6. But it’s worth admiring now
how well this works, to appreciate the virtue of the humble
inductor (an often-maligned circuit component).

A. Bypassing
The impedance of a capacitor decreases with increasing
frequency. This is the basis of another important application: bypassing. There are places in circuits where you
want to allow a dc voltage, but you don’t want signals
present. Placing a capacitor across that circuit element
(usually a resistor) will help to kill any signals there.
You choose the (noncritical) capacitor value so that its

As an example, look at Figure 1.111, a photograph
of a “mixer-digitizer” circuit board that we built for a
project some years back (specifically, a radio receiver with
250 million simultaneous channels). There’s lots of stuff on
the board, which has to frequency-shift and digitize three
