28
1.5. Inductors and transformers
Art of Electronics Third Edition

output

I

V(t)

C

where L is called the inductance and is measured in henrys
(or mH, μH, nH, etc.). Putting a constant voltage across an
inductor causes the current to rise as a ramp (compare with
a capacitor, in which a constant current causes the voltage
to rise as a ramp); 1 V across 1 H produces a current that
increases at 1 amp per second.

Figure 1.48. A constant-current source charging a capacitor generates a ramp voltage waveform.

V

Figure 1.50. Inductors. The parallel-bar symbol represents a core
of magnetic material.

Vsupply

“IC”

RC

Just as with capacitors, the energy invested in ramping
up the current in an inductor is stored internally, here in the
form of magnetic fields. And the analogous formula is

t

UL = 1

2LI2,
(1.24)

Figure 1.49. Constant-current charging (with finite compliance)
versus RC charging.

1.4.5 Not quite perfect. . .

where UL is in joules (watt seconds) for L in henrys and I
in amperes. As with capacitors, this is an important result,
one which lies at the core of switching power conversion
(exemplified by those little black “wall-warts” that provide
power to all manner of consumer electronic gadgets). We’ll
see lots more of this in Chapter 9.

Real capacitors (the kind you can see, and touch, and pay
money for) generally behave according to theory; but they
have some additional “features” that can cause problems in
some demanding applications. For example, all capacitors
exhibit some series resistance (which may be a function of
frequency), and some series inductance (see the next section), along with some frequency-dependent parallel resistance. Then there’s a “memory” effect (known as dielectric
absorption), which is rarely discussed in polite society: if
you charge a capacitor up to some voltage V0 and hold it
there for a while, and then discharge it to 0 V, then when
you remove the short across its terminals it will tend to
drift back a bit toward V0.

Don’t worry about this stuff, for now. We’ll treat in detail these effects (and other oddities of real-world components) in the advanced topics Chapter 1x.

1.5 Inductors and transformers

The symbol for an inductor looks like a coil of wire;
that’s because, in its simplest form, that’s all it is. Its somewhat peculiar behavior comes about because inductors are
magnetic devices, in which two things are going on: current
flowing through the coil creates a magnetic field aligned
along the coil’s axis; and then changes in that field produce a voltage (sometimes called “back EMF”) in a way
that tries to cancel out those changes (an effect known as
Lenz’s law). The inductance L of a coil is simply the ratio
of magnetic flux passing through the coil divided by the
current through the coil that produces that flux (multiplied
by an overall constant). Inductance depends on the coil geometry (e.g., diameter and length) and the properties of any
magnetic material (the “core”) that may be used to confine
the magnetic field. That’s all you need to understand why
the inductance of a coil of given geometry is proportional
to the square of the number of turns.

1.5.1 Inductors

Exercise 1.19. Explain why L ∝n2 for an inductor consisting of
a coil of n turns of wire, maintaining fixed diameter and length as
n is varied.

We’ll get into some more detail in the Chapter 1x. But
it’s worth displaying a semi-empirical formula for the approximate inductance L of a coil of diameter d and length
l, in which the n2 dependence is on display:

If you understand capacitors, you shouldn’t have great
trouble with inductors (Figure 1.50). They’re closely related to capacitors: the rate of current change in an inductor
is proportional to the voltage applied across it (for a capacitor it’s the other way around – the rate of voltage change is
proportional to the current through it). The defining equation for an inductor is

L ≈K
d2n2

V = LdI

18d +40l
μH,

dt ,
(1.23)
