Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.7.17. Th´evenin’s theorem generalized
55

7-section
LC

and the signal source (waveform, amplitude, and phase)
from the open-circuit output voltage and the short-circuit
output current.

lowpass

filter

1.8 Putting it all together – an AM radio

RC
lowpass

filter

0
2MHz
1MHz
input frequency

In our circuit course we tie together the topics of this
chapter by hooking up a simple AM radio. The signal
that’s transmitted is a sinewave at the station’s frequency
in the AM band (520–1720 kHz), with its amplitude varied (“modulated”) according to the audio waveform (Figure 1.113). In other words, an audio waveform described
by some function f(t) would be transmitted as a RF signal
[A + f(t)]sin2π fct; here fc is the station’s “carrier” frequency, and the constant A is added to the audio waveform
so that the coefficient [A+ f(t)] is never negative.

the audiofrequency

Figure 1.112. Frequency sweep of the LC lowpass filter shown in
Figure 1.111 compared with an RC lowpass filter with the same
1 MHz cutoff frequency. The dark outline is the amplitude envelope
of the fast swept sinewave, which achieves a sandpaper appearance in this digital ’scope capture.

waveform
(20Hz ~ 5kHz)

t

impedance at signal frequencies is small compared with
what it is bypassing. You will see much more of this in
later chapters.

the modulated
radiofrequency carrier

(~1MHz)

Figure 1.113. An AM signal consists of an RF carrier (∼1 MHz)
whose amplitude is varied by the audio-frequency signal (speech
or music; audible frequencies up to ∼5 kHz). The audio waveform
is dc offset so that the envelope does not cross zero.

B. Power-supply filtering
We saw this application in §1.6.3, to filter the ripple from
rectifier circuits. Although circuit designers often call them
filter capacitors, this is really a form of bypassing, or energy storage, with large-value capacitors; we prefer the
term storage capacitor. And these capacitors really are
large – they’re the big shiny round things you see inside most electronic instruments. We’ll get into dc powersupply design in detail in Chapter 9.

C. Timing and waveform generation
As we’ve seen, a capacitor supplied with a constant current
charges up with a ramp waveform. This is the basis of ramp
and sawtooth generators, used in analog function generators, oscilloscope sweep circuits, analog–digital converters, and timing circuits. RC circuits are also used for timing, and they form the basis of delay circuits (monostable
multivibrators). These timing and waveform applications
are important in many areas of electronics and will be covered in Chapters 3, 6, 10, and 11.

1.7.17 Th´evenin’s theorem generalized

At the receiver end (that’s us!) the task is to select this
station (among many) and somehow extract the modulating
envelope, which is the desired audio signal. Figure 1.114
shows the simplest AM radio; it is the “crystal set” of
yesteryear. It’s really quite straightforward: the parallel LC
resonant circuit is tuned to the station’s frequency by the
variable capacitor C1 (§1.7.14); the diode D is a half-wave
rectifier (§1.6.2), which (if ideal) would pass only the positive half-cycles of the modulated carrier; and R1 provides
a light load, so that the rectified output follows the halfcycles back down to zero. We’re almost done. We add small
capacitor C2 to prevent the output from following the fast
half-cycles of carrier (it’s a storage capacitor, §1.7.16B),
choosing the time constant R1C2 to be long compared with
a carrier period (∼1μs), but short compared with the period of the highest audio frequency (∼200μs).

When capacitors and inductors are included, Th´evenin’s
theorem must be restated: any two-terminal network of resistors, capacitors, inductors, and signal sources is equivalent to a single complex impedance in series with a single
signal source. As before, you find the (complex) impedance

Figures 1.115 and 1.116 show what you see when you
probe around with a ’scope. The bare antenna shows plenty
of low-frequency pickup (mostly 60 Hz ac powerline), and
a tiny bit of signal from all the AM stations at once. But
