8
1.2. Voltage, current, and resistance
Art of Electronics Third Edition

Figure 1.8. Most of the common potentiometer styles are shown here. Top row, left to right (panel mount): power wirewound, “type
AB” 2W carbon composition, 10-turn wirewound/plastic hybrid, ganged dual pot. Middle row (panel mount): optical encoder (continuous
rotation, 128 cycles per turn), single-turn cermet, single-turn carbon, screw-adjust single-turn locking. Front row (board-mount trimmers):
multiturn side-adjust (two styles), quad single-turn, 3/8′′ (9.5 mm) square single-turn, 1/4′′ (6.4 mm) square single-turn, 1/4′′ (6.4 mm)
round single-turn, 4 mm square single-turn surface mount, 4 mm square multiturn surface mount, 3/8′′ (9.5 mm) square multiturn, quad
nonvolatile 256-step integrated pot (E2POT) in 24-pin small-outline IC.

the following stage. In this case the voltage-divider equation tells you how much signal gets to the input of that last
stage. This will all become clearer after you know about
a remarkable fact (Th´evenin’s theorem) that will be discussed later. First, though, a short aside on voltage sources
and current sources.

current (when shorted) of 3 amps (which, however, will kill
the battery in a few minutes). A voltage source “likes” an
open-circuit load and “hates” a short-circuit load, for obvious reasons. (The meaning of “open circuit” and “short circuit” sometimes confuse the beginner: an open circuit has
nothing connected to it, whereas a short circuit is a piece
of wire bridging the output.) The symbols used to indicate
a voltage source are shown in Figure 1.9.

1.2.4 Voltage sources and current sources

A perfect voltage source is a two-terminal “black box” that
maintains a fixed voltage drop across its terminals, regardless of load resistance. This means, for instance, that it
must supply a current I = V/R when a resistance R is attached to its terminals. A real voltage source can supply
only a finite maximum current, and in addition it generally
behaves like a perfect voltage source with a small resistance in series. Obviously, the smaller this series resistance,
the better. For example, a standard 9 volt alkaline battery
behaves approximately like a perfect 9 volt voltage source
in series with a 3 Ω resistor, and it can provide a maximum

A perfect current source is a two-terminal black box
that maintains a constant current through the external circuit, regardless of load resistance or applied voltage. To do
this it must be capable of supplying any necessary voltage across its terminals. Real current sources (a muchneglected subject in most textbooks) have a limit to the
voltage they can provide (called the output-voltage compliance, or just compliance), and in addition they do not provide absolutely constant output current. A current source
“likes” a short-circuit load and “hates” an open-circuit
load. The symbols used to indicate a current source are
shown in Figure 1.10.
