Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.5.1. Inductors
29

Figure 1.51. Inductors. Top row, left to right: encapsulated toroid, hermetically-sealed toroid, board-mount pot core, bare toroid (two
sizes). Middle row: slug-tuned ferrite-core inductors (three sizes). Bottom row: high-current ferrite-core choke, ferrite-bead choke, dipped
radial-lead ferrite-core inductor, surface-mount ferrite chokes, molded axial-lead ferrite-core chokes (two styles), lacquered ferrite-core
inductors (two styles).

made in molds). See Figure 1.51 for some typical geometries.

where K = 1.0 or 0.395 for dimensions in inches or centimeters, respectively. This is known as Wheeler’s formula
and is accurate to 1% as long as l > 0.4d.

Inductors find heavy use in radiofrequency (RF) circuits, serving as RF “chokes” and as parts of tuned circuits (§1.7.14). A pair of closely coupled inductors forms
the interesting object known as a transformer. We will talk
briefly about them shortly.

An inductor is, in a real sense, the opposite of a capacitor.28 You will see how that works out later in the chapter
when we deal with the important subject of impedance.

As with capacitive current, inductive current is not simply proportional to voltage (as in a resistor). Furthermore,
unlike the situation in a resistor, the power associated with
inductive current (V×I) is not turned into heat, but is stored
as energy in the inductor’s magnetic field (recall that for a
capacitor the power associated with capacitive current is
likewise not dissipated as heat, but is stored as energy in
the capacitor’s electric field). You get all that energy back
when you interrupt the inductor’s current (with a capacitor
you get all the energy back when you discharge the voltage
to zero).

A. A look ahead: some magic with inductors
Just to give a taste of some of the tricks that you can do
with inductors, take a look at Figure 1.52. Although we’ll
understand these circuits a lot better when we go at them
in Chapter 9, it’s possible to see what’s going on with what
we know already. In Figure 1.52A the left-hand side of inductor L is alternately switched between a dc input voltage
Vin and ground, at some rapid rate, spending equal times

28 In practice, however, capacitors are much more widely used in electronic circuits. That is because practical inductors depart significantly
from ideal performance – by having winding resistance, core losses,
and self-capacitance – whereas practical capacitors are nearly perfect
(more on this in Chapter 1x). Inductors are indispensable, however, in
switching power converters, as well as in tuned LC circuits for RF applications.

The basic inductor is a coil, which may be just a loop
with one or more turns of wire; or it may be a coil with
some length, known as a solenoid. Variations include coils
wound on various core materials, the most popular being
iron (or iron alloys, laminations, or powder) and ferrite (a
gray, nonconductive, brittle magnetic material). These are
all ploys to multiply the inductance of a given coil by the
“permeability” of the core material. The core may be in the
shape of a rod, a toroid (doughnut), or even more bizarre
shapes, such as a “pot core” (which has to be seen to be
understood; the best description we can come up with is a
doughnut mold split horizontally in half, if doughnuts were
