Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.6.2. Rectification
31

transformer.” And leakage inductance causes a voltage
drop that depends on load current, as well as bedeviling circuits that have fast pulses or edges. Other departures from
ideal performance include winding resistance, core losses,
capacitance, and magnetic coupling to the outside world.
Unlike capacitors (which behave nearly ideally in most circuit applications), the deficiencies of inductors have significant effects in real-world circuit applications. We’ll deal
with these in Chapter 1x and Chapter 9.

1.6 Diodes and diode circuits

We are not done with capacitors and inductors! We have
dealt with them in the time domain (RC circuits, exponential charge and discharge, differentiators and integrators,
and so on), but we have not yet tackled their behavior in
the frequency domain.

which is measured in the nanoamp range for a generalpurpose diode (note the hugely different scales in the graph
for forward and reverse current), is almost never of any
consequence until you reach the reverse breakdown voltage (also called the peak inverse voltage, PIV), typically
75 volts for a general-purpose diode like the 1N4148. (Normally you never subject a diode to voltages large enough to
cause reverse breakdown; the exception is the zener diode
we mentioned earlier.) Frequently, also, the forward voltage drop of about 0.5 to 0.8 V is of little concern, and the
diode can be treated as a good approximation to an ideal
one-way conductor. There are other important characteristics that distinguish the thousands of diode types available,
e.g., maximum forward current, capacitance, leakage current, and reverse recovery time; Table 1.1 includes a few
popular diodes, to give a sense of the capabilities of these
little devices.

20mA

10mA
“FORWARD”

We will get to that soon enough. But this is a good time
to take a break from “RLC” and put our knowledge to use
with some clever and useful circuits. We begin by introducing a new device, the diode. It’s our first example of a
nonlinear device, and you can do nifty things with it.

–100V
–50V

1.6.1 Diodes

2V
1V

“REVERSE”

0.1μA

Note scale change!

0.2μA

Figure 1.55. Diode V–I curve.

The circuit elements we’ve discussed so far (resistors, capacitors, and inductors) are all linear, meaning that a doubling of the applied signal (a voltage, say) produces a doubling of the response (a current, say). This is true even for
the reactive devices (capacitors and inductors). These components are also passive, as opposed to active devices, the
latter exemplified by transistors, which are semiconductor
devices that control the flow of power. And they are all
two-terminal devices, which is self-explanatory.

anode
cathode

A
K

Before jumping into some circuits with diodes, we
should point out two things: (a) a diode doesn’t have a resistance (it doesn’t obey Ohm’s law). (b) If you put some
diodes in a circuit, it won’t have a Th´evenin equivalent.

Figure 1.54. Diode.

1.6.2 Rectification

The diode (Figure 1.54) is an important and useful twoterminal passive nonlinear device. It has the V–I curve
shown in Figure 1.55. (In keeping with the general philosophy of this book, we will not attempt to describe the
solid-state physics that makes such devices possible.)

A rectifier changes ac to dc; this is one of the simplest and
most important applications of diodes (which are sometimes called rectifiers). The simplest circuit is shown in
Figure 1.56. The “ac” symbol represents a source of ac
voltage; in electronic circuits it is usually provided by a
transformer, powered from the ac powerline. For a sinewave input that is much larger than the forward drop
(about 0.6 V for silicon diodes, the usual type), the output will look like that in Figure 1.57. If you think of the
diode as a one-way conductor, you won’t have any trouble

The diode’s arrow (the anode terminal) points in the direction of forward current flow. For example, if the diode
is in a circuit in which a current of 10 mA is flowing from
anode to cathode, then (from the graph) the anode is approximately 0.6 V more positive than the cathode; this is
called the “forward voltage drop.” The reverse current,
