30
1.5. Inductors and transformers
Art of Electronics Third Edition

Figure 1.53. Transformer.

connected to each (a “50% duty cycle”). But the defining equation V=LdI/dt requires that the average voltage
across an inductor must be zero, otherwise the magnitude
of its average current is rising without limit. (This is sometimes called the volt-second balance rule.) From this it follows that the average output voltage is half the input voltage (make sure you understand why). In this circuit C2
acts as a storage capacitor for steadying the output voltage
(more on this later, and in Chapter 9).

Transformers are quite efficient (output power is very
nearly equal to input power); thus, a step-up transformer
gives higher voltage at lower current. Jumping ahead for
a moment, a transformer of turns ratio n increases the
impedance by n2. There is very little primary current if the
secondary is unloaded.

Producing an output that is half the voltage of an input
is not very exciting; after all, a simple voltage divider can
do that. But, unlike a voltage divider, this circuit does not
waste any energy; apart from non-idealities of the components, it is 100% efficient. And in fact this circuit is widely
used in power conversion; it’s called a “synchronous buck
converter.”

But look now at Figure 1.52B, which is just a turnedaround version of Figure 1.52A. This time, volt-second
balance requires that the output voltage be twice the input voltage. You can’t do that with a voltage divider! Once
again, the output capacitor (C1 this time) serves to hold the
output voltage steady by storing charge. This configuration
is called a “synchronous boost converter.”

These and other switching converters are discussed extensively in Chapter 9, where Table 9.5 lists some fifty representative types.

L

+

+

Vin
C1

Power transformers (meant for use from the 115 V powerline) serve two important functions in electronic instruments: they change the ac line voltage to a useful (usually
lower) value that can be used by the circuit, and they “isolate” the electronic device from actual connection to the
powerline, because the windings of a transformer are electrically insulated from each other. They come in an enormous variety of secondary voltages and currents: outputs
as low as 1 volt or so up to several thousand volts, current
ratings from a few milliamps to hundreds of amps. Typical
transformers for use in electronic instruments might have
secondary voltages from 10 to 50 volts, with current ratings of 0.1 to 5 amps or so. A related class of transformers
is used in electronic power conversion, in which plenty of
power is flowing, but typically as pulse or square waveforms, and at much higher frequencies (50 kHz to 1 MHz
is typical).

–

Vout = Vin

C2

1
2

–

A.

50%

+

L

+

Vout = 2Vin

C1

Vin

C2

–

–

B.

50%

Figure 1.52. Inductors let you do neat tricks, such as increasing a
dc input voltage.

Transformers for signals at audio frequencies and radio frequencies are also available. At radio frequencies you
sometimes use tuned transformers if only a narrow range
of frequencies is present. There is also an interesting class
of transmission-line transformers. In general, transformers
for use at high frequencies must use special core materials or construction to minimize core losses, whereas lowfrequency transformers (e.g., ac powerline transformers)
are burdened instead by large and heavy cores. The two
kinds of transformers are in general not interchangeable.

1.5.2 Transformers

A transformer is a device consisting of two closely coupled
coils (called primary and secondary). An ac voltage applied
to the primary appears across the secondary, with a voltage
multiplication proportional to the turns ratio of the transformer, and with a current multiplication inversely proportional to the turns ratio. Power is conserved. Figure 1.53
shows the circuit symbol for a laminated-core transformer
(the kind used for 60 Hz ac power conversion).

A. Problems, problems. . .
This simple “first-look” description ignores interesting –
and important – issues. For example, there are inductances
associated with the transformer, as suggested by its circuit symbol: an effective parallel inductance (called the
magnetizing inductance) and an effective series inductance
(called the leakage inductance). Magnetizing inductance
causes a primary current even with no secondary load;
more significantly, it means that you cannot make a “dc
