Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.4.1. Capacitors
19

I = C dV

dt .
(1.15)

dielectric
(insulator)

outside foil

inside foil

Figure 1.28. You get a lot of area by rolling up a pair of metallized plastic films. And it’s great fun unrolling one of these axial-lead
Mylar capacitors (ditto for the old-style golf balls with their lengthy
wound-up rubber band).

So a capacitor is more complicated than a resistor: the current is not simply proportional to the voltage, but rather
to the rate of change of voltage. If you change the voltage
across a farad by 1 volt per second, you are supplying an
amp. Conversely, if you supply an amp, its voltage changes
by 1 volt per second. A farad is an enormous capacitance,
and you usually deal in microfarads (μF), nanofarads (nF),
or picofarads (pF).23 For instance, if you supply a current
of 1 mA to 1μF, the voltage will rise at 1000 volts per second. A 10 ms pulse of this current will increase the voltage
across the capacitor by 10 volts (Figure 1.29).

I

1mA

t

10ms

They allow you to make frequency-dependent voltage dividers, for instance. For some applications (bypass, coupling) this is almost all you need to know, but for other
applications (filtering, energy storage, resonant circuits) a
deeper understanding is needed. For example, ideal capacitors cannot dissipate power, even though current can flow
through them, because the voltage and current are 90◦out
of phase.

V

C=1μF

Vafter

10V

Vbefore

t

Figure 1.29. The voltage across a capacitor changes when a current flows through it.

When you charge up a capacitor, you’re supplying energy. The capacitor doesn’t get hot; instead, it stores the
energy in its internal electric fields. It’s an easy exercise to
discover for yourself that the amount of stored energy in a
charged capacitor is just

UC = 1

2CV 2,
(1.16)

where UC is in joules for C in farads and V in volts. This is
an important result; we’ll see it often.

Before launching into the details of capacitors in the following dozen pages (including some necessary mathematics that describes their behavior in time and in frequency),
we wish to emphasize those first two applications – bypass and coupling – because they are the most common
uses of capacitors, and they are easy to understand at the
simplest level. We’ll see these in detail later (§§1.7.1C and
1.7.16A), but no need to wait – it’s easy, and intuitive. Because a capacitor looks like an open circuit at dc, it lets
you couple a varying signal while blocking its average dc
level. This is a blocking capacitor (also called a coupling
capacitor), as in Figure 1.93. Likewise, because a capacitor looks like a short circuit at high frequencies, it suppresses (“bypasses”) signals where you don’t want them,
for example on the dc voltages that power your circuits, as
in Figure 8.80A (where capacitors are suppressing signals
on the +5 V and −5 V dc supply voltages, and also on the
base terminal of transistor Q2).22 Demographically, these
two applications account for the vast majority of capacitors that are wired into the world’s circuits.

Taking the derivative of the defining equation 1.13, you
get

Exercise 1.14. Take the energy challenge: imagine charging up
a capacitor of capacitance C, from 0 V to some final voltage Vf.
If you do it right, the result won’t depend on how you get there,

22 Ironically, these essential bypass capacitors are so taken for granted
that they are usually omitted from schematic diagrams (a practice we
follow in this book). Don’t make the mistake of omitting them also
from your actual circuits!

23 To make matters confusing to the uninitiated, the units are often omitted on capacitor values specified in schematic diagrams. You have to
figure it out from the context.
