Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.4.2. RC circuits: V and I versus time
23

circuits we can analyze simply with this time-domain approach.

R1

R2
Vin
V(t)

C

D. A circuit example: time-delay circuit
Let’s take a short detour to try out these theoretical ideas
on a couple of real circuits. Textbooks usually avoid such
pragmatism, especially in early chapters, but we think it’s
fun to apply electronics to practical applications. We’ll
need to introduce a few “black-box” components to get the
job done, but you’ll learn about them in detail later, so don’t
worry.

Figure 1.36. Looks complicated, but it’s not! (Th´evenin to the rescue.)

C. Simplification by Th´evenin equivalents
We could go ahead and analyze more complicated circuits
by similar methods, writing down the differential equations
and trying to find solutions. For most purposes it simply
isn’t worth it. This is as complicated an RC circuit as we
will need. Many other circuits can be reduced to it; take,
for example, the circuit in Figure 1.36. By just using the
Th´evenin equivalent of the voltage divider formed by R1
and R2, you can find the output V(t) produced by a step
input for Vin.

Exercise 1.17. In the circuit shown in Figure 1.36, R1 = R2 =10k,
and C =0.1 μF. Find V(t) and sketch it.

CMOS buffers

We have already mentioned logic levels, the voltages
that digital circuits live on. Figure 1.37 shows an application of capacitors to produce a delayed pulse. The triangular symbols are “CMOS24 buffers.” They give a HIGH output if the input is HIGH (more than one-half the dc powersupply voltage used to power them), and vice versa. The
first buffer provides a replica of the input signal, but with
low source resistance, to prevent input loading by the RC
(recall our earlier discussion of circuit loading in §1.2.5A).
The RC output has the characteristic decays and causes the
output buffer to switch 10 μs after the input transitions (an
RC reaches 50% output after a time t = 0.7RC). In an actual
application you would have to consider the effect of the
buffer input threshold deviating from one-half the supply
voltage, which would alter the delay and change the output
pulse width. Such a circuit is sometimes used to delay a
pulse so that something else can happen first. In designing
circuits you try not too often to rely on tricks like this, but
they’re occasionally handy.

B
15k
A
C

1000pF
‘1G17
‘1G17

A: input

B: RC

E. Another circuit example: “One Minute of Power”
Figure 1.38 shows another example of what can be done
with simple RC timing circuits. The triangular symbol is a
comparator, something we’ll treat in detail later, in Chapters 4 and 10; all you need to know, for now, is that (a) it is
an IC (containing a bunch of resistors and transistors), (b)
it is powered from some positive dc voltage that you connect to the pin labeled “V+,” and (c) it drives its output (the
wire sticking out to the right) either to V+ or to ground, depending on whether the input labeled “+” is more or less
positive than the input labeled “−,” respectively. (These are
called the non-inverting and the inverting inputs, respectively.) It doesn’t draw any current from its inputs, but it
happily drives loads that require up to 20 mA or so. And a
comparator is decisive: its output is either “HIGH” (at V+)
or “LOW” (ground).

C: output

10μs
10μs

Here’s how the circuit works: the voltage divider R3R4
holds the (−) input at 37% of the supply voltage, in this
case about +1.8 V; let’s call that the “reference voltage.”

Figure 1.37. Producing a delayed digital waveform with the help of
an RC and a pair of LVC-family logic buffers (tiny parts with a huge
part number: SN74LVC1G17DCKR!).

24 Complementary metal-oxide semiconductor, the dominant form of digital logic, as we’ll see from Chapter 10 onward.
