56
1.9. Other passive components
Art of Electronics Third Edition

point “X”

antenna

audio
amplifier

R1 only

point “Y”

X

D
Y

R1+C2

point “X”

R1
L

C2
C1

speaker

Figure 1.114. The simplest AM receiver. Variable capacitor C1
tunes the desired station, diode D picks off the positive envelope
(smoothed by R1C2), and the resulting weak audio signal is amplified to drive the loudspeaker, loudly.

Figure 1.116. Observed waveforms at point “Y” with R1 only (top)
and with smoothing capacitor C2 included (bottom). The upper pair
is a single-shot capture (with the ∼1 MHz carrier appearing as
solid black), and the lower pair is a separate single-shot capture, in
which we have offset the rectified wave for clarity. Vertical: 1 V/div;
horizontal: 1 ms/div.

when you connect it to the LC resonant circuit, all the lowfrequency stuff disappears (because the LC looks like a
very low impedance, Figure 1.107) and it sees only the selected AM station. What’s interesting here is that the amplitude of the selected station is much larger with the LC
attached than with nothing connected to the antenna: that’s
because the resonant circuit’s high Q is storing energy from
multiple cycles of the signal.49

antenna

(open-ckt)

And one amusing final note: in our class, we like to
show the effect of probing point “X” with a length of BNC
(bayonet Neill–Concelman) cable going to a ’scope input
(that’s how we start out, in the first week). When we do
that, the cable’s capacitance (about 30 pF/ft) adds to C1,
lowering the resonant frequency and so tuning to a different station. If we choose right, it changes languages (from
English to Spanish)! The students howl with laughter – a
language-translating electronic component. Then we use
an ordinary ’scope probe, with its ∼10 pF of capacitance:
no change of station, nor of language.

1.9 Other passive components

antenna

(parallel LC

to ground)

In the following subsections we would like to introduce
briefly an assortment of miscellaneous but essential components. If you are experienced in electronic construction,
you may wish to proceed to the next chapter.

1.9.1 Electromechanical devices: switches

Figure 1.115. Observed waveforms at point “X” from the bare antenna (top) and with the LC connected. Note that the low-frequency
junk disappears and that the radio signal gets larger. These are
single-shot traces, in which the ∼1 MHz radiofrequency carrier appears as a solid filled area. Vertical: 1 V/div; horizontal: 4 ms/div.

These mundane but important devices seem to wind up in
most electronic equipment. It is worth spending a few paragraphs on the subject (and there’s more in Chapter 1x). Figures 1.117 and 1.118 show some common switch types.

The audio amplifier is fun, too, but we’re not ready for
it. We’ll see how to make one of those in Chapter 2 (with
discrete transistors), and again in Chapter 4 (with operational amplifiers, the Lego™block of analog design).

49 There are more complicated ways of framing this, but you don’t really
want to know just yet...

A. Toggle switches
The simple toggle switch is available in various configurations, depending on the number of poles; Figure 1.119
shows the usual ones (SPST indicates a single-pole singlethrow switch, SPDT indicates a single-pole double-throw
