Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.2.2. Relationship between voltage and current: resistors
3

Figure 1.2. A selection of common resistor types. Top row, left to right (wirewound ceramic power resistors): 20W vitreous enamel with
leads, 20W with mounting studs, 30W vitreous enamel, 5W and 20W with mounting studs. Middle row (wirewound power resistors): 1W,
3W, and 5W axial ceramic; 5W, 10W, 25W, and 50W conduction-cooled (“Dale-type”). Bottom row: 2W, 1W, 1
2W, 1
4 W, and 1
8 W carbon
composition; surface-mount thick-film (2010, 1206, 0805, 0603, and 0402 sizes); surface-mount resistor array; 6-, 8-, and 10-pin single
in-line package arrays; dual in-line package array. The resistor at bottom is the ubiquitous RN55D 1

4 W, 1% metal-film type; and the pair
of resistors above are Victoreen high-resistance types (glass, 2 GΩ; ceramic, 5 GΩ).

Soon, when we deal with periodically varying voltages
and currents, we will have to generalize the simple equation P = VI to deal with average power, but it’s correct as
a statement of instantaneous power just as it stands.

Incidentally, don’t call current “amperage”; that’s
strictly bush league.5 The same caution will apply to the
term “ohmage”6 when we get to resistance in the next
section.

1.2.2 Relationship between voltage and current:
resistors

capacitors (I proportional to rate of change of V), diodes
(I flows in only one direction), thermistors (temperaturedependent resistor), photoresistors (light-dependent resistor), strain gauges (strain-dependent resistor), etc., are examples. Perhaps more interesting still are three-terminal
devices, such as transistors, in which the current that can
flow between a pair of terminals is controlled by the voltage applied to a third terminal. We will gradually get into
some of these exotic devices; for now, we will start with
the most mundane (and most widely used) circuit element,
the resistor (Figure 1.3).

Figure 1.3. Resistor.

This is a long and interesting story. It is the heart of electronics. Crudely speaking, the name of the game is to make
and use gadgets that have interesting and useful I-versus-
V characteristics. Resistors (I simply proportional to V),

5 Unless you’re a power engineer working with giant 13 kV transformers
and the like – those guys are allowed to say amperage.
6 ...also, Dude, “ohmage” is not the preferred nomenclature: resistance,
please.

A. Resistance and resistors
It is an interesting fact that the current through a metallic conductor (or other partially conducting material) is
proportional to the voltage across it. (In the case of wire
