34
1.6. Diodes and diode circuits
Art of Electronics Third Edition

I

2.0 A

0

~1ms

Figure 1.64. Illustrating greater I2R heating with discontinuous
current flow.

rewired with the two halves in parallel, the resultant combined secondary winding connected to a full-wave bridge.
Now, to deliver the same output power, each half winding
in (a), during its conduction cycle, must supply the same
current as the parallel pair in (b). But the power dissipated
in the winding resistances goes like I2R, so the power lost
to heating in the transformer secondary windings reduced
by a factor of 2 for the bridge configuration (b).

+V

+

ground

ac
in

+

–V

Figure 1.65. Dual-polarity (split) supply.

+V

+

Here’s another way to see the problem: imagine we use
the same transformer as in (a), but for our comparison circuit we replace the pair of diodes with a bridge, as in Figure 1.62, and we leave the center tap unconnected. Now,
to deliver the same output power, the current through the
winding during that time is twice what it would be for a true
full-wave circuit. To expand on this subtle point: heating in
the windings, calculated from Ohm’s law, is I2R, so you
have four times the heating for half the time, or twice the
average heating of an equivalent full-wave bridge circuit.
You would have to choose a transformer with a current rating 1.4 (square root of 2) times as large compared with the
(better) bridge circuit; besides costing more, the resulting
supply would be bulkier and heavier.

load

+

com

Figure 1.66. Voltage doubler.

Exercise 1.21. This illustration of I2R heating may help you understand the disadvantage of the center-tapped rectifier circuit.
What fuse rating (minimum) is required for passing the current
waveform shown in Figure 1.64, which has 1 amp average current? Hint: a fuse “blows out” by melting a metallic link (I2R
heating), for steady currents larger than its rating. Assume for
this problem that the thermal time constant of the fusible link
is much longer than the time scale of the square wave, i.e.,
that the fuse responds to the value of I2 averaged over many
cycles.

D. Voltage multipliers
The circuit shown in Figure 1.66 is called a voltage doubler. Think of it as two half-wave rectifier circuits in series. It is officially a full-wave rectifier circuit because both
halves of the input waveform are used – the ripple frequency is twice the ac frequency (120 Hz for the 60 Hz line
voltage in the United States).

C. Split supply
A popular variation of the center-tapped full-wave circuit
is shown in Figure 1.65. It gives you split supplies (equal
plus and minus voltages), which many circuits need. It is an
efficient circuit, because both halves of the input waveform
are used in each winding section.

Variations of this circuit exist for voltage triplers,
quadruplers, etc. Figure 1.67 shows doubler, tripler, and
quadrupler circuits that let you ground one side of the transformer. You can extend this scheme as far as you want, producing what’s called a Cockcroft–Walton generator; these
are used in arcane applications (such as particle accelerators) and in everyday applications (such as image intensifiers, air ionizers, laser copiers, and even bug zappers) that
require a high dc voltage but hardly any current.

+
ac

in

1.6.5 Regulators

Figure 1.63. Full-wave rectifier using center-tapped transformer.

By choosing capacitors that are sufficiently large, you can
reduce the ripple voltage to any desired level. This bruteforce approach has three disadvantages.
