Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.6.8. Interlude: inductors as friends
39

+20V

A

100Ω

I

0.05μF

B

BOOM!

Figure 1.85. RC “snubber” for suppressing inductive kick.

Figure 1.83. Inductive “kick.”

+

(at turnoff)
Ion

is proportional to the voltage across it. For applications
in which the current must decay quickly (high-speed
actuators or relays, camera shutters, magnet coils, etc.), it
may be better to put a resistor across the inductor, choosing
its value so that Vsupply + IR is less than the maximum
allowed voltage across the switch. For the fastest decay
with a given maximum voltage, a zener with series diode
(or other voltage-clamping device) can be used instead,
giving a linear-like ramp-down of current rather than an
exponential decay (see discussion in Chapter 1x).

Figure 1.84. Blocking inductive kick.

For inductors driven from ac (transformers, ac relays),
the diode protection just described will not work, because
the diode will conduct on alternate half-cycles when the
switch is closed. In that case a good solution is an RC
“snubber” network (Figure 1.85). The values shown are
typical for small inductive loads driven from the ac powerline. Such a snubber should be included in all instruments
that run from the ac powerline, because the power transformer is inductive.33

loads can be easily damaged, especially the component
that “breaks down” in order to satisfy the inductor’s craving for continuity of current. Consider the circuit in Figure 1.83. The switch is initially closed, and current is flowing through the inductor (which might be a relay, as described later). When the switch is opened, the inductor tries
to keep current flowing from A to B, as it had been. In other
words, it tries to make current flow out of B, which it does
by forcing B to a high positive voltage (relative to A). In a
case like this, in which there’s no connection to terminal B,
it may go 1000 V positive before the switch contact “blows
over.” This shortens the life of the switch and also generates impulsive interference that may affect other circuits
nearby. If the switch happens to be a transistor, it would be
an understatement to say that its life is shortened; its life is
ended.

An alternative to the RC snubber is the use of a bidirectional zener-like voltage-clamping element. Among these
the most common are the bidirectional “TVS” (transient
voltage suppressor) zener and the metal-oxide varistor
(“MOV”); the latter is an inexpensive device that looks
something like a disc ceramic capacitor and behaves electrically like a bidirectional zener diode. Both classes are designed for transient voltage protection, are variously available at voltage ratings from 10 to 1000 volts, and can
handle transient currents up to thousands of amperes (see
Chapter 9x). Including a transient suppressor (with appropriate fusing) across the ac powerline terminals makes
good sense in a piece of electronic equipment, not only to
prevent inductive spike interference to other nearby instruments but also to prevent occasional large powerline spikes
from damaging the instrument itself.

1.6.8 Interlude: inductors as friends

The best solution usually is to put a diode across the
inductor, as in Figure 1.84. When the switch is on, the
diode is back-biased (from the dc drop across the inductor’s winding resistance). At turn-off the diode goes into
conduction, putting the switch terminal a diode drop above
the positive supply voltage. The diode must be able to handle the initial diode current, which equals the steady current
that had been flowing through the inductor; something like
a 1N4004 is fine for nearly all cases.

Lest we leave the impression that inductance and inductors are things only to be feared, let’s look at the circuit in

33 As explained in §9.5.1, you should choose a capacitor rated for
“across-the-line” service.

The only disadvantage of this simple protection circuit
is that it lengthens the decay of current through the
inductor, because the rate of change of inductor current
