Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.6.6. Circuit applications of diodes
35

+

regulator

ac

in
out

+

in

+

ground

load

Figure 1.68. Regulated dc power supply.

doubler

A.

+

ac

+

in

10% of the dc voltage), then use an active feedback circuit
to eliminate the remaining ripple. Such a feedback circuit
“looks at” the output, making changes in a controllable series resistor (a transistor) as necessary to keep the output
voltage constant (Figure 1.68). This is known as a “linear
regulated dc power supply.”32

load

+

tripler

B.

+

ac

+

in

+

These voltage regulators are used almost universally as
power supplies for electronic circuits. Nowadays complete
voltage regulators are available as inexpensive ICs (priced
under $1). A power supply built with a voltage regulator
can be made easily adjustable and self-protecting (against
short circuits, overheating, etc.), with excellent properties
as a voltage source (e.g., internal resistance measured in
milliohms). We will deal with regulated dc power supplies
in Chapter 9.

load

+

1.6.6 Circuit applications of diodes

quadrupler

C.

Figure 1.67. Voltage multipliers; these configurations don’t require
a floating voltage source.

A. Signal rectifier
There are other occasions when you use a diode to make
a waveform of one polarity only. If the input waveform
isn’t a sinewave, you usually don’t think of it as a rectification in the sense of a power supply. For instance, you
might want a train of pulses corresponding to the rising
edge of a square wave. The easiest way is to rectify the differentiated wave (Figure 1.69). Always keep in mind the
0.6 V(approximately) forward drop of the diode. This circuit, for instance, gives no output for square waves smaller
than 0.6 V pp. If this is a problem, there are various tricks
to circumvent this limitation. One possibility is to use hot
carrier diodes (Schottky diodes), with a forward drop of
about 0.25 V.

A possible circuit solution to this problem of finite diode
drop is shown in Figure 1.70. Here D1 compensates D2’s
forward drop by providing 0.6 V of bias to hold D2 at the
threshold of conduction. Using a diode (D1) to provide
the bias (rather than, say, a voltage divider) has several

• The required capacitors may be prohibitively bulky and
expensive.
• The very short interval of current flow during each cycle31 (only very near the top of the sinusoidal waveform)
produces more I2R heating.
• Even with the ripple reduced to negligible levels, you still
have variations of output voltage that are due to other
causes, e.g., the dc output voltage will be roughly proportional to the ac input voltage, giving rise to fluctuations caused by input line voltage variations. In addition,
changes in load current will still cause the output voltage to change because of the finite internal resistances of
the transformer, diode, etc. In other words, the Th´evenin
equivalent circuit of the dc power supply has R > 0.

A better approach to power-supply design is to use
enough capacitance to reduce ripple to low levels (perhaps

31 Called the conduction angle.

32 A popular variant is the regulated switching power converter. Although
its operation is quite different in detail, it uses the same feedback principle to maintain a constant output voltage. See Chapter 9 for much
more on both techniques.
