Art of Electronics Third Edition
1.9.5. Variable components
63

For use inside an instrument, rather than on the front
panel, trimmer pots come in single-turn and multiturn
styles, most intended for printed-circuit mounting. These
are handy for calibration adjustments of the “set-andforget” type. Good advice: resist the temptation to use lots
of trimmers in your circuits. Use good design instead.

CCW
CW

Figure 1.127. Potentiometer (three-terminal variable resistor).

The symbol for a variable resistor, or pot, is shown in
Figure 1.127. Sometimes the symbols CW and CCW are
used to indicate the clockwise and counterclockwise ends.

Figure 1.126. Components to avoid. We advise against using
components like these, if you have a choice (see text if you need
convincing!). Top row, left to right: low-value wirewound pot, type
UHF connector, electrical tape (“just say no!”). Middle row: “cinchtype” connectors, microphone connector, hexagon connectors.
Bottom row: slide switch, cheap IC socket (not “screw-machined”),
type-F connector, open-element trimmer pot, phono connector.

An all-electronic version of a potentiometer can be
made with an array of electronic (transistor) switches that
select a tap in a long chain of fixed resistors. As awkward as that may sound, it is a perfectly workable scheme
when implemented as an IC. For example, Analog Devices,
Maxim/Dallas Semiconductor, and Xicor make a series of
“digital potentiometers” with up to 1024 steps; they come
as single or dual units, and some of them are “nonvolatile,”
meaning that they remember their last setting even if power
has been turned off. These find application in consumer
electronics (televisions, stereos) where you want to adjust
the volume from your infrared remote control, rather than
by turning a knob; see §3.4.3E.

as 7-segment numeric displays or (for displaying letters as
well as numbers – “alphanumeric”) 16-segment displays or
dot-matrix displays. However, if more than a few digits or
characters need to be displayed, LCDs are generally preferred. These come in line-oriented arrays (e.g., 16 characters by 1 line, up to 40 characters by 4 lines), with a simple interface that permits sequential or addressable entry
of alphanumeric characters and additional symbols. They
are inexpensive, low power, and visible even in sunlight.
Back-lighted versions work well even in subdued light, but
are not low power. Much more on these (and other) optoelectronic devices in §12.5.

1.9.5 Variable components

One important point about variable resistors: don’t attempt to use a potentiometer as a substitute for a precise
resistor value somewhere within a circuit. This is tempting,
because you can trim the resistance to the value you want.
The trouble is that potentiometers are not as stable as good
(1%) resistors, and in addition they may not have good resolution (i.e., they can’t be set to a precise value). If you
must have a precise and settable resistor value somewhere,
use a combination of a 1% (or better) precision resistor and
a potentiometer, with the fixed resistor contributing most
of the resistance. For example, if you need a 23.4k resistor,
use a 22.6k 1% fixed resistor (a standard value) in series
with a 2k trimmer pot. Another possibility is to use a series
combination of several precision resistors, selecting the last
(and smallest) resistor to give the desired series resistance.

A. Variable resistors
Variable resistors (also called volume controls, potentiometers, pots, or trimmers) are useful as panel controls
or internal adjustments in circuits. A classic panel type is
the 2-watt-type AB potentiometer; it uses the same basic
material as the fixed carbon-composition resistor, with a
rotatable “wiper” contact. Other panel types are available
with ceramic or plastic resistance elements, with improved
characteristics. Multiturn types (3, 5, or 10 turns) are available, with counting dials, for improved resolution and linearity. “Ganged” pots (several independent sections on one
shaft) are also manufactured, although in limited variety,
for applications that demand them. Figure 1.8 shows a representative selection of pots and trimmers.

As we’ll see later (§3.2.7), it is possible to use FETs as
voltage-controlled variable resistors in some applications.
Another possibility is an “optophotoresistor” (§12.7).
Transistors can be used as variable-gain amplifiers, again
controlled by a voltage. Keep an open mind when design
brainstorming.
