38
1.6. Diodes and diode circuits
Art of Electronics Third Edition

V = A sin ωt

Vout
R
Vin
( 0.6V)

Figure 1.81. Approximate log converter.

A.

Vin

Vout ∝ log Vin
R
B

+0.6V

dV

dt = ωA

D1

D2

A

–0.6 V

–0.6V

R1

B.

–V

Figure 1.82. Diode drop compensation in the logarithmic converter.

+0.6V

–0.6V

C.

Figure 1.79. A. Limiting large-amplitude sinewaves; B. details; and
C. spikes.

point A at about −0.6 V. Point B is then near ground (making Iin accurately proportional to Vin, incidentally). As long
as the two (identical) diodes are at the same temperature,
there is good cancellation of the forward drops, except, of
course, for the difference owing to input current through
D1, which produces the desired output. In this circuit, R1
should be chosen so that the current through D2 is significantly larger than the maximum input current in order to
keep D2 in conduction.

Iin

Vout ∝ log Iin

Figure 1.80. Exploiting the diode’s nonlinear V–I curve: logarithmic converter.

In Chapter 2x we will examine better ways of constructing logarithmic converter circuits, along with careful methods of temperature compensation. With such methods it is
possible to construct logarithmic converters accurate to a
few percent over six decades or more of input current. A
better understanding of diode and transistor characteristics,
along with an understanding of op-amps, is necessary first.
This section is meant to serve only as an introduction for
things to come.

1.6.7 Inductive loads and diode protection

What happens if you open a switch that is providing current
to an inductor? Because inductors have the property

voltage across it at a given temperature (for a discussion
of the exact law, see §2.3.1). So you can use a diode to
generate an output voltage proportional to the logarithm
of a current (Figure 1.80). Because V hovers in the region
of 0.6 V, with only small voltage changes that reflect input
current variations, you can generate the input current with
a resistor if the input voltage is much larger than a diode
drop (Figure 1.81).

V = LdI/dt,

it is not possible to turn off the current suddenly, because
that would imply an infinite voltage across the inductor’s
terminals. What happens instead is that the voltage across
the inductor rises abruptly and keeps rising until it forces
current to flow. Electronic devices controlling inductive

In practice, you may want an output voltage that isn’t
offset by the 0.6 V diode drop. In addition, it would be
nice to have a circuit that is insensitive to changes in temperature (a silicon diode’s voltage drop decreases approximately 2 mV/◦C). The method of diode drop compensation
is helpful here (Figure 1.82). R1 makes D2 conduct, holding
