62
1.9. Other passive components
Art of Electronics Third Edition

Figure 1.125. RF and shielded connectors. The panel-mounting receptacle is shown to the left of each cable-mounted plug. Top row, left
to right: stereo phone jack, audio “XLR” type; N and UHF (RF connectors). Second row down: BNC, TNC, type F; MHV and SHV (high
voltage). Third row down: 2.5 mm (3/32′′) audio, 3.5 mm stereo, improved 3.5 mm stereo, phono (“RCA type”), LEMO coaxial. Bottom
row: SMA (panel jack, flexible coax plug), SMA (board-mount jack, rigid coax plug), SMB; SC and ST (optical fiber).

percentage motor load, frequency, etc. Digital panel meters
often provide the option of logic-level outputs, in addition
to the visible display, for internal use by the instrument.

placed with LEDs. The latter behave electrically like ordinary diodes, but with a forward voltage drop in the range
of 1.5 to 2 volts (for red, orange, and some green LEDs;
3.6 V for blue54 and high-brightness green; see Figure 2.8).
When current flows in the forward direction, they light up.
Typically, 2 mA to 10 mA produces adequate brightness.
LEDs are cheaper than incandescent lamps, they last pretty
much forever, and they come in four standard colors as well
as “white” (which is usually a blue LED with a yellow fluorescent coating). They come in convenient panel-mounting
packages; some even provide built-in current limiting.55

As a substitute for a dedicated meter (whether analog
or digital), you increasingly see an LCD (liquid-crystal
display) or LED panel with a meter-like pattern. This is
flexible and efficient: with a graphic LCD display module
(§12.5.3) you can offer the user a choice of “meters,” according to the quantity being displayed, all under the control of an embedded controller (a built-in microprocessor;
see Chapter 15).

LEDs can also be used for digital displays, for example

54 The invention of the gallium nitride blue LED was the breakthrough
product of a lone and unappreciated employee of Nichia Chemical Industries, Shuji Nakamura.
55 And of course, for both residential and commercial area lighting, LEDs
have now largely relegated to the dustbin of history the century-old
hot-filament incandescent lamp.

B. Lamps, LEDs, and displays
Flashing lights, screens full of numbers and letters, eerie
sounds – these are the stuff of science fiction movies, and
except for the last, they form the subject of lamps and displays (see §12.5.3). Small incandescent lamps used to be
standard for front-panel indicators, but they have been re-
